Virgin Australia Airlines (NZ) Limited formerly Pacific Blue Airlines (NZ) Limited, was an airline based in New Zealand. It was established as the New Zealand subsidiary of Australian airline Virgin Blue (now Virgin Australia). It was a fully owned subsidiary of Virgin Australia Holdings Limited. It was renamed Virgin Australia Airlines (NZ) Ltd in December 2011 when its parent company decided to bring all its airlines under the one banner.
It was based at Christchurch International Airport, it operated air services between New Zealand and Australia, and to the Pacific Islands. It also operated services on behalf of Virgin Samoa (formerly known as Polynesian Blue).
The airline has brought all its flying under its parent VA Air Operating Certificate. The final New Zealand registered Virgin Australia aircraft ZK-PBL finished up flying Friday 13-March-2015 as VA161 AKL-BNE, bringing a visible end to VANZ. With the withdrawal of ZK-PBL the New Zealand register connection ends after 11 years of aircraft on the New Zealand register 23/01/04 - 14/03/15.


== History ==
The airline was established in 2003 and started operations on 29 January 2004 with a service between Christchurch and Brisbane, Australia.
As of 1 August 2007 (local date), the ICAO code was changed from PBI to PBN. This was done in consultation with air traffic controllers to prevent confusion between the letter I and the number 1 in flight plans.
On 21 August 2007, Pacific Blue announced its intention to begin domestic services in New Zealand with the first flights commencing 12 November 2007. The initial routes were AucklandWellington, ChristchurchWellington and AucklandChristchurch. Later Christchurch to Dunedin flights started.
Pacific Blue announced its roll out of Premium economy seating across its fleet from March 2010 to match that of its sister Virgin Blue. Premium Economy is the front three rows of each aircraft  fitted with a unique red leather converter seat that folds from three abreast to two abreast when used in Premium Economy configuration.
On 16 August 2010 it was announced that Pacific Blue would be withdrawing from the New Zealand domestic market, with aircraft being reallocated to tran-tasman and medium-haul routes.
The last-ever Pacific Blue domestic New Zealand service was operated on 17 October 2010, from Wellington to Auckland.
Pacific Blue was renamed Virgin Australia Airlines (NZ) Ltd in December 2011, as part of a unification of the company's holdings under a common brand.
In March 2015 the last New Zealand registered Virgin 737 ZK-PBL was withdrawn and placed on the Australian register, ending over 11 years of New Zealand AOC operations. All aircraft were distributed between Virgin Australia's domestic and international arms on the VH register.
VANZ Auckland and Christchurch based pilots and cabin crew continue to fly the same routes and some of the same aircraft under the Virgin Australia International Airlines air operator certificate.


== Destinations ==
The airline operated scheduled passenger services between New Zealand and Australia; and to the Pacific Islands. New Zealand served airports are: Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Dunedin and Queenstown. Formerly Hamilton was served from Brisbane services ended in October 2012. International destinations served are: Brisbane, Gold Coast, Melbourne, Nadi, Port Vila, Apia, Nuku'alofa, Rarotonga and Sydney. Formerly Cairns (ex Auckland), Port Moresby, and Honiara (both ex Brisbane) were served.


== Fleet ==
The fleet consisted of all modern Boeing 737 aircraft:


== See also ==

Virgin Group
Virgin Atlantic
Virgin America


== References ==


== External links ==
Virgin Australia: New ZealandRMIT's School of Economics, Finance and Marketing is an Australian tertiary education school within the College of Business at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT University), located in Melbourne, Victoria.


== See also ==
RMIT University


== References ==


== External links ==
School of Economics, Finance and MarketingHead & Shoulders (H&S) is an American brand of anti-dandruff and non-dandruff shampoo produced by parent company Procter & Gamble that was introduced in 1961. By 1982, it was the "number one brand" of shampoo, and it was noted that "[n]o one hair care brand gets so many ad dollars as Head & Shoulders, a 20- year-old brand, and no other brand matches its sales", despite it being a "medicated" shampoo. Since the 1980s, the brand has long been marketed under the tagline, "You Never Get a Second Chance to Make a First Impression", which has been identified as an example of "anxiety marketing" commonly used by Procter & Gamble to drive sales by inducing fears of social consequences associated with the condition that the product claims to address. In the 2000s, however, sales of the product dropped off - a phenomenon blamed on overextension of the brand into too many varieties, with over thirty kinds of Head & Shoulders being sold.
A large number of celebrities have appeared in advertising campaigns for the brand, including Mexican celebrity Thala, British Formula One driver Jenson Button, and Indian model Nauheed Cyrusi.
The active ingredient is pyrithione zinc.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteComputer vision is an interdisciplinary field that deals with how computers can be made to gain high-level understanding from digital images or videos. From the perspective of engineering, it seeks to automate tasks that the human visual system can do.
Computer vision tasks include methods for acquiring, processing, analyzing and understanding digital images, and in general, deal with the extraction of high-dimensional data from the real world in order to produce numerical or symbolic information, e.g., in the forms of decisions. Understanding in this context means the transformation of visual images (the input of the retina) into descriptions of the world that can interface with other thought processes and elicit appropriate action. This image understanding can be seen as the disentangling of symbolic information from image data using models constructed with the aid of geometry, physics, statistics, and learning theory.
As a scientific discipline, computer vision is concerned with the theory behind artificial systems that extract information from images. The image data can take many forms, such as video sequences, views from multiple cameras, or multi-dimensional data from a medical scanner. As a technological discipline, computer vision seeks to apply its theories and models for the construction of computer vision systems.
Sub-domains of computer vision include scene reconstruction, event detection, video tracking, object recognition, object pose estimation, learning, indexing, motion estimation, and image restoration.


== History ==
In the late 1960s, computer vision began at universities that were pioneering artificial intelligence. It was meant to mimic the human visual system, as a stepping stone to endowing robots with intelligent behavior. In 1966, it was believed that this could be achieved through a summer project, by attaching a camera to a computer and having it "describe what it saw".
What distinguished computer vision from the prevalent field of digital image processing at that time was a desire to extract three-dimensional structure from images with the goal of achieving full scene understanding. Studies in the 1970s formed the early foundations for many of the computer vision algorithms that exist today, including extraction of edges from images, labeling of lines, non-polyhedral and polyhedral modeling, representation of objects as interconnections of smaller structures, optical flow, and motion estimation.
The next decade saw studies based on more rigorous mathematical analysis and quantitative aspects of computer vision. These include the concept of scale-space, the inference of shape from various cues such as shading, texture and focus, and contour models known as snakes. Researchers also realized that many of these mathematical concepts could be treated within the same optimization framework as regularization and Markov random fields.
By the 1990s, some of the previous research topics became more active than the others. Research in projective 3-D reconstructions led to better understanding of camera calibration. With the advent of optimization methods for camera calibration, it was realized that a lot of the ideas were already explored in bundle adjustment theory from the field of photogrammetry. This led to methods for sparse 3-D reconstructions of scenes from multiple images. Progress was made on the dense stereo correspondence problem and further multi-view stereo techniques. At the same time, variations of graph cut were used to solve image segmentation. This decade also marked the first time statistical learning techniques were used in practice to recognize faces in images (see Eigenface). Toward the end of the 1990s, a significant change came about with the increased interaction between the fields of computer graphics and computer vision. This included image-based rendering, image morphing, view interpolation, panoramic image stitching and early light-field rendering.
Recent work has seen the resurgence of feature-based methods, used in conjunction with machine learning techniques and complex optimization frameworks.


== Related fields ==
Areas of artificial intelligence deal with autonomous planning or deliberation for robotical systems to navigate through an environment. A detailed understanding of these environments is required to navigate through them. Information about the environment could be provided by a computer vision system, acting as a vision sensor and providing high-level information about the environment and the robot.
Artificial intelligence and computer vision share other topics such as pattern recognition and learning techniques. Consequently, computer vision is sometimes seen as a part of the artificial intelligence field or the computer science field in general.
Solid-state physics is another field that is closely related to computer vision. Most computer vision systems rely on image sensors, which detect electromagnetic radiation, which is typically in the form of either visible or infra-red light. The sensors are designed using quantum physics. The process by which light interacts with surfaces is explained using physics. Physics explains the behavior of optics which are a core part of most imaging systems. Sophisticated image sensors even require quantum mechanics to provide a complete understanding of the image formation process. Also, various measurement problems in physics can be addressed using computer vision, for example motion in fluids.
A third field which plays an important role is neurobiology, specifically the study of the biological vision system. Over the last century, there has been an extensive study of eyes, neurons, and the brain structures devoted to processing of visual stimuli in both humans and various animals. This has led to a coarse, yet complicated, description of how "real" vision systems operate in order to solve certain vision related tasks. These results have led to a subfield within computer vision where artificial systems are designed to mimic the processing and behavior of biological systems, at different levels of complexity. Also, some of the learning-based methods developed within computer vision (e.g. neural net and deep learning based image and feature analysis and classification) have their background in biology.
Some strands of computer vision research are closely related to the study of biological vision  indeed, just as many strands of AI research are closely tied with research into human consciousness, and the use of stored knowledge to interpret, integrate and utilize visual information. The field of biological vision studies and models the physiological processes behind visual perception in humans and other animals. Computer vision, on the other hand, studies and describes the processes implemented in software and hardware behind artificial vision systems. Interdisciplinary exchange between biological and computer vision has proven fruitful for both fields.
Yet another field related to computer vision is signal processing. Many methods for processing of one-variable signals, typically temporal signals, can be extended in a natural way to processing of two-variable signals or multi-variable signals in computer vision. However, because of the specific nature of images there are many methods developed within computer vision which have no counterpart in processing of one-variable signals. Together with the multi-dimensionality of the signal, this defines a subfield in signal processing as a part of computer vision.
Beside the above-mentioned views on computer vision, many of the related research topics can also be studied from a purely mathematical point of view. For example, many methods in computer vision are based on statistics, optimization or geometry. Finally, a significant part of the field is devoted to the implementation aspect of computer vision; how existing methods can be realized in various combinations of software and hardware, or how these methods can be modified in order to gain processing speed without losing too much performance.
The fields most closely related to computer vision are image processing, image analysis and machine vision. There is a significant overlap in the range of techniques and applications that these covers. This implies that the basic techniques that are used and developed in these fields are more or less identical, something which can be interpreted as there is only one field with different names. On the other hand, it appears to be necessary for research groups, scientific journals, conferences and companies to present or market themselves as belonging specifically to one of these fields and, hence, various characterizations which distinguish each of the fields from the others have been presented.
Computer vision is, in some ways, the inverse of computer graphics. While computer graphics produces image data from 3D models, computer vision often produces 3D models from image data. There is also a trend towards a combination of the two disciplines, e.g., as explored in augmented reality.
The following characterizations appear relevant but should not be taken as universally accepted:
Image processing and image analysis tend to focus on 2D images, how to transform one image to another, e.g., by pixel-wise operations such as contrast enhancement, local operations such as edge extraction or noise removal, or geometrical transformations such as rotating the image. This characterization implies that image processing/analysis neither require assumptions nor produce interpretations about the image content.
Computer vision includes 3D analysis from 2D images. This analyzes the 3D scene projected onto one or several images, e.g., how to reconstruct structure or other information about the 3D scene from one or several images. Computer vision often relies on more or less complex assumptions about the scene depicted in an image.
Machine vision is the process of applying a range of technologies & methods to provide imaging-based automatic inspection, process control and robot guidance in industrial applications. Machine vision tends to focus on applications, mainly in manufacturing, e.g., vision based autonomous robots and systems for vision based inspection or measurement. This implies that image sensor technologies and control theory often are integrated with the processing of image data to control a robot and that real-time processing is emphasised by means of efficient implementations in hardware and software. It also implies that the external conditions such as lighting can be and are often more controlled in machine vision than they are in general computer vision, which can enable the use of different algorithms.
There is also a field called imaging which primarily focus on the process of producing images, but sometimes also deals with processing and analysis of images. For example, medical imaging includes substantial work on the analysis of image data in medical applications.
Finally, pattern recognition is a field which uses various methods to extract information from signals in general, mainly based on statistical approaches and artificial neural networks. A significant part of this field is devoted to applying these methods to image data.
Photogrammetry also overlaps with computer vision, e.g., stereophotogrammetry vs. stereo computer vision.


== Applications ==
Applications range from tasks such as industrial machine vision systems which, say, inspect bottles speeding by on a production line, to research into artificial intelligence and computers or robots that can comprehend the world around them. The computer vision and machine vision fields have significant overlap. Computer vision covers the core technology of automated image analysis which is used in many fields. Machine vision usually refers to a process of combining automated image analysis with other methods and technologies to provide automated inspection and robot guidance in industrial applications. In many computer vision applications, the computers are pre-programmed to solve a particular task, but methods based on learning are now becoming increasingly common. Examples of applications of computer vision include systems for:
Controlling processes, e.g., an industrial robot;
Navigation, e.g., by an autonomous vehicle or mobile robot;
Detecting events, e.g., for visual surveillance or people counting;
Organizing information, e.g., for indexing databases of images and image sequences;
Modeling objects or environments, e.g., medical image analysis or topographical modeling;
Interaction, e.g., as the input to a device for computer-human interaction, and
Automatic inspection, e.g., in manufacturing applications.

One of the most prominent application fields is medical computer vision or medical image processing. This area is characterized by the extraction of information from image data for the purpose of making a medical diagnosis of a patient. Generally, image data is in the form of microscopy images, X-ray images, angiography images, ultrasonic images, and tomography images. An example of information which can be extracted from such image data is detection of tumours, arteriosclerosis or other malign changes. It can also be measurements of organ dimensions, blood flow, etc. This application area also supports medical research by providing new information, e.g., about the structure of the brain, or about the quality of medical treatments. Applications of computer vision in the medical area also includes enhancement of images that are interpreted by humans, for example ultrasonic images or X-ray images, to reduce the influence of noise.
A second application area in computer vision is in industry, sometimes called machine vision, where information is extracted for the purpose of supporting a manufacturing process. One example is quality control where details or final products are being automatically inspected in order to find defects. Another example is measurement of position and orientation of details to be picked up by a robot arm. Machine vision is also heavily used in agricultural process to remove undesirable food stuff from bulk material, a process called optical sorting.
Military applications are probably one of the largest areas for computer vision. The obvious examples are detection of enemy soldiers or vehicles and missile guidance. More advanced systems for missile guidance send the missile to an area rather than a specific target, and target selection is made when the missile reaches the area based on locally acquired image data. Modern military concepts, such as "battlefield awareness", imply that various sensors, including image sensors, provide a rich set of information about a combat scene which can be used to support strategic decisions. In this case, automatic processing of the data is used to reduce complexity and to fuse information from multiple sensors to increase reliability.

One of the newer application areas is autonomous vehicles, which include submersibles, land-based vehicles (small robots with wheels, cars or trucks), aerial vehicles, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). The level of autonomy ranges from fully autonomous (unmanned) vehicles to vehicles where computer vision based systems support a driver or a pilot in various situations. Fully autonomous vehicles typically use computer vision for navigation, i.e. for knowing where it is, or for producing a map of its environment (SLAM) and for detecting obstacles. It can also be used for detecting certain task specific events, e.g., a UAV looking for forest fires. Examples of supporting systems are obstacle warning systems in cars, and systems for autonomous landing of aircraft. Several car manufacturers have demonstrated systems for autonomous driving of cars, but this technology has still not reached a level where it can be put on the market. There are ample examples of military autonomous vehicles ranging from advanced missiles, to UAVs for recon missions or missile guidance. Space exploration is already being made with autonomous vehicles using computer vision, e.g., NASA's Mars Exploration Rover and ESA's ExoMars Rover.
Other application areas include:
Support of visual effects creation for cinema and broadcast, e.g., camera tracking (matchmoving).
Surveillance.


== Representational and control requirements ==
Image-understanding systems (IUS) include three levels of abstraction as follows: Low level includes image primitives such as edges, texture elements, or regions; intermediate level includes boundaries, surfaces and volumes; and high level includes objects, scenes, or events. Many of these requirements are really topics for further research.
The representational requirements in the designing of IUS for these levels are: representation of prototypical concepts, concept organization, spatial knowledge, temporal knowledge, scaling, and description by comparison and differentiation.
While inference refers to the process of deriving new, not explicitly represented facts from currently known facts, control refers to the process that selects which of the many inference, search, and matching techniques should be applied at a particular stage of processing. Inference and control requirements for IUS are: search and hypothesis activation, matching and hypothesis testing, generation and use of expectations, change and focus of attention, certainty and strength of belief, inference and goal satisfaction.


== Typical tasks ==
Each of the application areas described above employ a range of computer vision tasks; more or less well-defined measurement problems or processing problems, which can be solved using a variety of methods. Some examples of typical computer vision tasks are presented below.


=== Recognition ===
The classical problem in computer vision, image processing, and machine vision is that of determining whether or not the image data contains some specific object, feature, or activity. Different varieties of the recognition problem are described in the literature:
Object recognition (also called object classification)  one or several pre-specified or learned objects or object classes can be recognized, usually together with their 2D positions in the image or 3D poses in the scene. Blippar, Google Goggles and LikeThat provide stand-alone programs that illustrate this functionality.
Identification  an individual instance of an object is recognized. Examples include identification of a specific person's face or fingerprint, identification of handwritten digits, or identification of a specific vehicle.
Detection  the image data are scanned for a specific condition. Examples include detection of possible abnormal cells or tissues in medical images or detection of a vehicle in an automatic road toll system. Detection based on relatively simple and fast computations is sometimes used for finding smaller regions of interesting image data which can be further analyzed by more computationally demanding techniques to produce a correct interpretation.
Currently, the best algorithms for such tasks are based on convolutional neural networks. An illustration of their capabilities is given by the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge; this is a benchmark in object classification and detection, with millions of images and hundreds of object classes. Performance of convolutional neural networks, on the ImageNet tests, is now close to that of humans. The best algorithms still struggle with objects that are small or thin, such as a small ant on a stem of a flower or a person holding a quill in their hand. They also have trouble with images that have been distorted with filters (an increasingly common phenomenon with modern digital cameras). By contrast, those kinds of images rarely trouble humans. Humans, however, tend to have trouble with other issues. For example, they are not good at classifying objects into fine-grained classes, such as the particular breed of dog or species of bird, whereas convolutional neural networks handle this with ease.
Several specialized tasks based on recognition exist, such as:
Content-based image retrieval  finding all images in a larger set of images which have a specific content. The content can be specified in different ways, for example in terms of similarity relative a target image (give me all images similar to image X), or in terms of high-level search criteria given as text input (give me all images which contains many houses, are taken during winter, and have no cars in them).

Pose estimation  estimating the position or orientation of a specific object relative to the camera. An example application for this technique would be assisting a robot arm in retrieving objects from a conveyor belt in an assembly line situation or picking parts from a bin.
Optical character recognition (OCR)  identifying characters in images of printed or handwritten text, usually with a view to encoding the text in a format more amenable to editing or indexing (e.g. ASCII).
2D Code reading Reading of 2D codes such as data matrix and QR codes.
Facial recognition
Shape Recognition Technology (SRT) in people counter systems differentiating human beings (head and shoulder patterns) from objects


=== Motion analysis ===
Several tasks relate to motion estimation where an image sequence is processed to produce an estimate of the velocity either at each points in the image or in the 3D scene, or even of the camera that produces the images . Examples of such tasks are:
Egomotion  determining the 3D rigid motion (rotation and translation) of the camera from an image sequence produced by the camera.
Tracking  following the movements of a (usually) smaller set of interest points or objects (e.g., vehicles or humans) in the image sequence.
Optical flow  to determine, for each point in the image, how that point is moving relative to the image plane, i.e., its apparent motion. This motion is a result both of how the corresponding 3D point is moving in the scene and how the camera is moving relative to the scene.


=== Scene reconstruction ===
Given one or (typically) more images of a scene, or a video, scene reconstruction aims at computing a 3D model of the scene. In the simplest case the model can be a set of 3D points. More sophisticated methods produce a complete 3D surface model. The advent of 3D imaging not requiring motion or scanning, and related processing algorithms is enabling rapid advances in this field. Grid-based 3D sensing can be used to acquire 3D images from multiple angles. Algorithms are now available to stitch multiple 3D images together into point clouds and 3D models.


=== Image restoration ===
The aim of image restoration is the removal of noise (sensor noise, motion blur, etc.) from images. The simplest possible approach for noise removal is various types of filters such as low-pass filters or median filters. More sophisticated methods assume a model of how the local image structures look like, a model which distinguishes them from the noise. By first analysing the image data in terms of the local image structures, such as lines or edges, and then controlling the filtering based on local information from the analysis step, a better level of noise removal is usually obtained compared to the simpler approaches.
An example in this field is inpainting.


== System methods ==
The organization of a computer vision system is highly application dependent. Some systems are stand-alone applications which solve a specific measurement or detection problem, while others constitute a sub-system of a larger design which, for example, also contains sub-systems for control of mechanical actuators, planning, information databases, man-machine interfaces, etc. The specific implementation of a computer vision system also depends on if its functionality is pre-specified or if some part of it can be learned or modified during operation. Many functions are unique to the application. There are, however, typical functions which are found in many computer vision systems.
Image acquisition  A digital image is produced by one or several image sensors, which, besides various types of light-sensitive cameras, include range sensors, tomography devices, radar, ultra-sonic cameras, etc. Depending on the type of sensor, the resulting image data is an ordinary 2D image, a 3D volume, or an image sequence. The pixel values typically correspond to light intensity in one or several spectral bands (gray images or colour images), but can also be related to various physical measures, such as depth, absorption or reflectance of sonic or electromagnetic waves, or nuclear magnetic resonance.
Pre-processing  Before a computer vision method can be applied to image data in order to extract some specific piece of information, it is usually necessary to process the data in order to assure that it satisfies certain assumptions implied by the method. Examples are
Re-sampling in order to assure that the image coordinate system is correct.
Noise reduction in order to assure that sensor noise does not introduce false information.
Contrast enhancement to assure that relevant information can be detected.
Scale space representation to enhance image structures at locally appropriate scales.

Feature extraction  Image features at various levels of complexity are extracted from the image data. Typical examples of such features are
Lines, edges and ridges.
Localized interest points such as corners, blobs or points.

More complex features may be related to texture, shape or motion.
Detection/segmentation  At some point in the processing a decision is made about which image points or regions of the image are relevant for further processing. Examples are
Selection of a specific set of interest points
Segmentation of one or multiple image regions which contain a specific object of interest.
Segmentation of image into nested scene architecture comprised foreground, object groups, single objects or salient object parts (also referred to as spatial-taxon scene hierarchy)

High-level processing  At this step the input is typically a small set of data, for example a set of points or an image region which is assumed to contain a specific object. The remaining processing deals with, for example:
Verification that the data satisfy model-based and application specific assumptions.
Estimation of application specific parameters, such as object pose or object size.
Image recognition  classifying a detected object into different categories.
Image registration  comparing and combining two different views of the same object.

Decision making Making the final decision required for the application, for example:
Pass/fail on automatic inspection applications
Match / no-match in recognition applications
Flag for further human review in medical, military, security and recognition applications


== Hardware ==
There are many kinds of computer vision systems, nevertheless all of them contain these basic elements: a power source, at least one image acquisition device (i.e. camera, ccd, etc.), a processor as well as control and communication cables or some kind of wireless interconnection mechanism. In addition, a practical vision system contains software, as well as a display in order to monitor the system. Vision systems for inner spaces, as most industrial ones, contain an illumination system and may be placed in a controlled environment. Furthermore, a completed system includes many accessories like camera supports, cables and connectors.
While traditional broadcast and consumer video systems operate at a rate of 30 frames per second, advances in digital signal processing and consumer graphics hardware has made high-speed image acquisition, processing, and display possible for real-time systems on the order of hundreds to thousands of frames per second. For applications in robotics, fast, real-time video systems are critically important and often can simplify the processing needed for certain algorithms. When combined with a high-speed projector, fast image acquisition allows 3D measurement and feature tracking to be realised.
As of 2016, vision processing units are emerging as a new class of processor, to complement CPUs and GPUs in this role.


== See also ==
AI effect
Applications of artificial intelligence
Machine vision glossary
Visual system
Visual perception
Vision science


=== Lists ===
List of computer vision topics
List of emerging technologies
Outline of artificial intelligence


== References ==


== Further reading ==
David Marr (1982). Vision. W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-1284-9. 
Azriel Rosenfeld; Avinash Kak (1982). Digital Picture Processing. Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-597301-2. 
Barghout, Lauren; Lawrence W. Lee (2003). Perceptual information processing system. U.S. Patent Application 10/618,543. ISBN 0-262-08159-8. 
Berthold Klaus Paul Horn (1986). Robot Vision. MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-08159-8. 
Olivier Faugeras (1993). Three-Dimensional Computer Vision, A Geometric Viewpoint. MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-06158-9. 
Tony Lindeberg (1994). Scale-Space Theory in Computer Vision. Springer. ISBN 0-7923-9418-6. 
James L. Crowley and Henrik I. Christensen (Eds.) (1995). Vision as Process. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3-540-58143-X. 
Gsta H. Granlund; Hans Knutsson (1995). Signal Processing for Computer Vision. Kluwer Academic Publisher. ISBN 0-7923-9530-1. 
Reinhard Klette; Karsten Schluens; Andreas Koschan (1998). Computer Vision  Three-Dimensional Data from Images. Springer, Singapore. ISBN 981-3083-71-9. 
Emanuele Trucco; Alessandro Verri (1998). Introductory Techniques for 3-D Computer Vision. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-261108-2. 
Bernd Jhne (2002). Digital Image Processing. Springer. ISBN 3-540-67754-2. 
Richard Hartley and Andrew Zisserman (2003). Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-54051-8. 
Grard Medioni; Sing Bing Kang (2004). Emerging Topics in Computer Vision. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-101366-1. 
R. Fisher; K Dawson-Howe; A. Fitzgibbon; C. Robertson; E. Trucco (2005). Dictionary of Computer Vision and Image Processing. John Wiley. ISBN 0-470-01526-8. 
Nikos Paragios and Yunmei Chen and Olivier Faugeras (2005). Handbook of Mathematical Models in Computer Vision. Springer. ISBN 0-387-26371-3. 
Wilhelm Burger; Mark J. Burge (2007). Digital Image Processing: An Algorithmic Approach Using Java. Springer. ISBN 1-84628-379-5. 
Pedram Azad; Tilo Gockel; Rdiger Dillmann (2008). Computer Vision  Principles and Practice. Elektor International Media BV. ISBN 0-905705-71-8. 
Richard Szeliski (2010). Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-1848829343. 
J. R. Parker (2011). Algorithms for Image Processing and Computer Vision (2nd ed.). Wiley. ISBN 978-0470643853. 
Michael C.Fairhurst (1988). Computer Vision for robotic systems. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-166919-2. 


== External links ==
USC Iris computer vision conference list
Computer vision papers on the web A complete list of papers of the most relevant computer vision conferences.
Computer Vision Online News, source code, datasets and job offers related to computer vision.
Keith Price's Annotated Computer Vision Bibliography
CVonline Bob Fisher's Compendium of Computer Vision.
British Machine Vision Association Supporting computer vision research within the UK via the BMVC and MIUA conferences, Annals of the BMVA (open-source journal), BMVA Summer School and one-day meetingsAsia (/e, e/) is Earth's largest and most populous continent, located primarily in the eastern and northern hemispheres and sharing the continental landmass of Eurasia with the continent of Europe. Asia covers an area of 44,579,000 square kilometers, about 30% of Earth's total land area and 8.7% of the Earth's total surface area. The continent, which has long been home to the majority of the human population, was the site of many of the first civilizations. Asia is notable for not only its overall large size and population, but also dense and large settlements as well as vast barely populated regions within the continent of 4.4 billion people.
In general terms, Asia is bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the south by the Indian Ocean and on the north by the Arctic Ocean. The western boundary with Europe is a historical and cultural construct, as there is no clear physical and geographical separation between them. The most commonly accepted boundaries place Asia to the east of the Suez Canal, the Ural River, and the Ural Mountains, and south of the Caucasus Mountains and the Caspian and Black Seas.
China and India alternated in being the largest economies in the world from 1 to 1800 A.D. China was a major economic power and attracted many to the east, and for many the legendary wealth and prosperity of the ancient culture of India personified Asia, attracting European commerce, exploration and colonialism. The accidental discovery of America by Columbus in search for India demonstrates this deep fascination. The Silk Road became the main East-West trading route in the Asian hitherland while the Straits of Malacca stood as a major sea route. Asia has exhibited economic dynamism (particularly East Asia) as well as robust population growth during the 20th century, but overall population growth has since fallen. Asia was the birthplace of most of the world's mainstream religions including Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism (or Daoism), Jainism, Sikhism, Zoroastranism, as well as many other religions.
Given its size and diversity, the concept of Asiaa name dating back to classical antiquitymay actually have more to do with human geography than physical geography. Asia varies greatly across and within its regions with regard to ethnic groups, cultures, environments, economics, historical ties and government systems. It also has a mix of many different climates ranging from the equatorial south via the hot desert in the Middle East, temperate areas in the east and the extremely continental center to vast subarctic and polar areas in Siberia.


== Definition and boundaries ==


=== Asia-Africa boundary ===
The boundary between Asia and Africa is the Red Sea, the Gulf of Suez, and the Suez Canal. This makes Egypt a transcontinental country, with the Sinai peninsula in Asia and the remainder of the country in Africa.


=== AsiaEurope boundary ===

The border between Asia and Europe was historically defined by European academics. The Don River became unsatisfactory to northern Europeans when Peter the Great, king of the Tsardom of Russia, defeating rival claims of Sweden and the Ottoman Empire to the eastern lands, and armed resistance by the tribes of Siberia, synthesized a new Russian Empire extending to the Ural Mountains and beyond, founded in 1721. The major geographical theorist of the empire was actually a former Swedish prisoner-of-war, taken at the Battle of Poltava in 1709 and assigned to Tobolsk, where he associated with Peter's Siberian official, Vasily Tatishchev, and was allowed freedom to conduct geographical and anthropological studies in preparation for a future book.
In Sweden, five years after Peter's death, in 1730 Philip Johan von Strahlenberg published a new atlas proposing the Urals as the border of Asia. The Russians were enthusiastic about the concept, which allowed them to keep their European identity in geography. Tatishchev announced that he had proposed the idea to von Strahlenberg. The latter had suggested the Emba River as the lower boundary. Over the next century various proposals were made until the Ural River prevailed in the mid-19th century. The border had been moved perforce from the Black Sea to the Caspian Sea into which the Ural River projects. The border between the Black Sea and the Caspian is usually placed along the crest of the Caucasus Mountains, although it is sometimes placed further north.


=== AsiaOceania boundary ===
The border between Asia and the loosely defined region of Oceania is usually placed somewhere in the Malay Archipelago. The terms Southeast Asia and Oceania, devised in the 19th century, have had several vastly different geographic meanings since their inception. The chief factor in determining which islands of the Malay Archipelago are Asian has been the location of the colonial possessions of the various empires there (not all European). Lewis and Wigen assert, "The narrowing of 'Southeast Asia' to its present boundaries was thus a gradual process."


=== Ongoing definition ===

Geographical Asia is a cultural artifact of European conceptions of the world, beginning with the Ancient Greeks, being imposed onto other cultures, an imprecise concept causing endemic contention about what it means. Asia is larger and more culturally diverse than Europe. It does not exactly correspond to the cultural borders of its various types of constituents.
From the time of Herodotus a minority of geographers have rejected the three-continent system (Europe, Africa, Asia) on the grounds that there is no or is no substantial physical separation between them. For example, Sir Barry Cunliffe, the emeritus professor of European archeology at Oxford, argues that Europe has been geographically and culturally merely "the western excrescence of the continent of Asia". Geographically, Asia is the major eastern constituent of the continent of Eurasia with Europe being a northwestern peninsula of the landmass. Asia, Europe and Africa make up a single continuous landmass - Afro-Eurasia (except for the Suez Canal) and share a common continental shelf. Almost all of Europe and the better part of Asia sit atop the Eurasian Plate, adjoined on the south by the Arabian and Indian Plate and with the easternmost part of Siberia (east of the Chersky Range) on the North American Plate.


== Etymology ==

The English word, "Asia," was originally a concept of Greek civilization. The place name, "Asia", in various forms in a large number of modern languages is of unknown ultimate provenience. Its etymology and language of origin are uncertain. It appears to be one of the most ancient of recorded names. A number of theories have been published. English Asia can be traced through the formation of English literature to Latin literature, where it has the same form, Asia. Whether all uses and all forms of the name derive also from the Latin of the Roman Empire is much less certain.


=== Bronze Age ===
Before Greek poetry, the Aegean Sea area was in a Greek Dark Age, at the beginning of which syllabic writing was lost and alphabetic writing had not begun. Prior to then in the Bronze Age the records of the Assyrian Empire, the Hittite Empire and the various Mycenaean states of Greece mention a region undoubtedly Asia, certainly in Anatolia, including if not identical to Lydia. These records are administrative and do not include poetry.
The Mycenaean states were destroyed about 1200 BC by unknown agents although one school of thought assigns the Dorian invasion to this time. The burning of the palaces baked clay diurnal administrative records written in a Greek syllabic script called Linear B, deciphered by a number of interested parties, most notably by a young World War II cryptographer, Michael Ventris, subsequently assisted by the scholar, John Chadwick. A major cache discovered by Carl Blegen at the site of ancient Pylos included hundreds of male and female names formed by different methods.
Some of these are of women held in servitude (as study of the society implied by the content reveals). They were used in trades, such as cloth-making, and usually came with children. The epithet, lawiaiai, "captives," associated with some of them identifies their origin. Some are ethnic names. One in particular, aswiai, identifies "women of Asia." Perhaps they were captured in Asia, but some others, Milatiai, appear to have been of Miletus, a Greek colony, which would not have been raided for slaves by Greeks. Chadwick suggests that the names record the locations where these foreign women were purchased. The name is also in the singular, Aswia, which refers both to the name of a country and to a female of it. There is a masculine form, aswios. This Aswia appears to have been a remnant of a region known to the Hittites as Assuwa, centered on Lydia, or "Roman Asia." This name, Assuwa, has been suggested as the origin for the name of the continent "Asia". The Assuwa league was a confederation of states in western Anatolia, defeated by the Hittites under Tudhaliya I around 1400 BC.
Alternatively, the etymology of the term may be from the Akkadian word (w)a(m), which means 'to go outside' or 'to ascend', referring to the direction of the sun at sunrise in the Middle East and also likely connected with the Phoenician word asa meaning east. This may be contrasted to a similar etymology proposed for Europe, as being from Akkadian erbu(m) 'to enter' or 'set' (of the sun).
T.R. Reid supports this alternative etymology, noting that the ancient Greek name must have derived from asu, meaning 'east' in Assyrian (ereb for Europe meaning 'west'). The ideas of Occidental (form Latin Occidens 'setting') and Oriental (from Latin Oriens for 'rising') are also European invention, synonymous with Western and Eastern. Reid further emphasizes that it explains the Western point of view of placing all the peoples and cultures of Asia into a single classification, almost as if there were a need for setting the distinction between Western and Eastern civilizations on the Eurasian continent. Ogura Kazuo and Tenshin Okakura are two outspoken Japanese figures on the subject.


=== Classical antiquity ===
Latin Asia and Greek  appear to be the same word. Roman authors translated  as Asia. The Romans named a province Asia, which roughly corresponds with modern-day central-western Turkey. There was an Asia Minor and an Asia Major located in modern-day Iraq. As the earliest evidence of the name is Greek, it is likely circumstantially that Asia came from , but ancient transitions, due to the lack of literary contexts, are difficult to catch in the act. The most likely vehicles were the ancient geographers and historians, such as Herodotus, who were all Greek. Ancient Greek certainly evidences early and rich uses of the name.
The first continental use of Asia is attributed to Herodotus (about 440 BC), not because he innovated it, but because his Histories are the earliest surviving prose to describe it in any detail. He defines it carefully, mentioning the previous geographers whom he had read, but whose works are now missing. By it he means Anatolia and the Persian Empire, in contrast to Greece and Egypt. Herodotus comments that he is puzzled as to why three women's names were "given to a tract which is in reality one" (Europa, Asia, and Libya, referring to Africa), stating that most Greeks assumed that Asia was named after the wife of Prometheus (i.e. Hesione), but that the Lydians say it was named after Asies, son of Cotys, who passed the name on to a tribe at Sardis. In Greek mythology, "Asia" () or "Asie" () was the name of a "Nymph or Titan goddess of Lydia."
In ancient Greek religion, places were under the care of female divinities, parallel to guardian angels. The poets detailed their doings and generations in allegoric language salted with entertaining stories, which subsequently playwrights transformed into classical Greek drama and became "Greek mythology." For example, Hesiod mentions the daughters of Tethys and Ocean, among whom are a "holy company", "who with the Lord Apollo and the Rivers have youths in their keeping." Many of these are geographic: Doris, Rhodea, Europa, Asia. Hesiod explains:

"For there are three-thousand neat-ankled daughters of Ocean who are dispersed far and wide, and in every place alike serve the earth and the deep waters."

The Iliad (attributed by the ancient Greeks to Homer) mentions two Phrygians (the tribe that replaced the Luvians in Lydia) in the Trojan War named Asios (an adjective meaning "Asian"); and also a marsh or lowland containing a marsh in Lydia as .


== History ==

The history of Asia can be seen as the distinct histories of several peripheral coastal regions: East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia and the Middle East, linked by the interior mass of the Central Asian steppes.
The coastal periphery was home to some of the world's earliest known civilizations, each of them developing around fertile river valleys. The civilizations in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley and the Yellow River shared many similarities. These civilizations may well have exchanged technologies and ideas such as mathematics and the wheel. Other innovations, such as writing, seem to have been developed individually in each area. Cities, states and empires developed in these lowlands.
The central steppe region had long been inhabited by horse-mounted nomads who could reach all areas of Asia from the steppes. The earliest postulated expansion out of the steppe is that of the Indo-Europeans, who spread their languages into the Middle East, South Asia, and the borders of China, where the Tocharians resided. The northernmost part of Asia, including much of Siberia, was largely inaccessible to the steppe nomads, owing to the dense forests, climate and tundra. These areas remained very sparsely populated.

The center and the peripheries were mostly kept separated by mountains and deserts. The Caucasus and Himalaya mountains and the Karakum and Gobi deserts formed barriers that the steppe horsemen could cross only with difficulty. While the urban city dwellers were more advanced technologically and socially, in many cases they could do little in a military aspect to defend against the mounted hordes of the steppe. However, the lowlands did not have enough open grasslands to support a large horsebound force; for this and other reasons, the nomads who conquered states in China, India, and the Middle East often found themselves adapting to the local, more affluent societies.
The Islamic Caliphate took over the Middle East and Central Asia during the Muslim conquests of the 7th century. The Mongol Empire conquered a large part of Asia in the 13th century, an area extending from China to Europe. Before the Mongol invasion, Song dynasty reportedly had approximately 120 million citizens; the 1300 census which followed the invasion reported roughly 60 million people.
The Black Death, one of the most devastating pandemics in human history, is thought to have originated in the arid plains of central Asia, where it then travelled along the Silk Road.
The Russian Empire began to expand into Asia from the 17th century, and would eventually take control of all of Siberia and most of Central Asia by the end of the 19th century. The Ottoman Empire controlled Anatolia, the Middle East, North Africa and the Balkans from the 16th century onwards. In the 17th century, the Manchu conquered China and established the Qing Dynasty. The Islamic Mughal Empire and the Hindu Maratha Empire controlled much of India in the 16th and 18th centuries respectively.


== Geography and climate ==

Asia is the largest continent on Earth. It covers 8.8% of the Earth's total surface area (or 30% of its land area), and has the largest coastline, at 62,800 kilometres (39,022 mi). Asia is generally defined as comprising the eastern four-fifths of Eurasia. It is located to the east of the Suez Canal and the Ural Mountains, and south of the Caucasus Mountains (or the KumaManych Depression) and the Caspian and Black Seas. It is bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the south by the Indian Ocean and on the north by the Arctic Ocean. Asia is subdivided into 48 countries, two of them (Russia and Turkey) having part of their land in Europe.
Asia has extremely diverse climates and geographic features. Climates range from arctic and subarctic in Siberia to tropical in southern India and Southeast Asia. It is moist across southeast sections, and dry across much of the interior. Some of the largest daily temperature ranges on Earth occur in western sections of Asia. The monsoon circulation dominates across southern and eastern sections, due to the presence of the Himalayas forcing the formation of a thermal low which draws in moisture during the summer. Southwestern sections of the continent are hot. Siberia is one of the coldest places in the Northern Hemisphere, and can act as a source of arctic air masses for North America. The most active place on Earth for tropical cyclone activity lies northeast of the Philippines and south of Japan. The Gobi Desert is in Mongolia and the Arabian Desert stretches across much of the Middle East. The Yangtze River in China is the longest river in the continent. The Himalayas between Nepal and China is the tallest mountain range in the world. Tropical rainforests stretch across much of southern Asia and coniferous and deciduous forests lie farther north.


=== Climate change ===
A survey carried out in 2010 by global risk analysis farm Maplecroft identified 16 countries that are extremely vulnerable to climate change. Each nation's vulnerability was calculated using 42 socio, economic and environmental indicators, which identified the likely climate change impacts during the next 30 years. The Asian countries of Bangladesh, India, Vietnam, Thailand, Pakistan and Sri Lanka were among the 16 countries facing extreme risk from climate change. Some shifts are already occurring. For example, in tropical parts of India with a semi-arid climate, the temperature increased by 0.4 C between 1901 and 2003. A 2013 study by the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) aimed to find science-based, pro-poor approaches and techniques that would enable Asia's agricultural systems to cope with climate change, while benefitting poor and vulnerable farmers. The study's recommendations ranged from improving the use of climate information in local planning and strengthening weather-based agro-advisory services, to stimulating diversification of rural household incomes and providing incentives to farmers to adopt natural resource conservation measures to enhance forest cover, replenish groundwater and use renewable energy.


== Economy ==

Asia has the second largest nominal GDP of all continents, after Europe, but the largest when measured in purchasing power parity. Nowadays Asia contribute 40 percent of Global GDP increased from 20 percent in mid last century. As of 2011, the largest economies in Asia are China, Japan, India, South Korea and Indonesia. Based on Global Office Locations 2011, Asia dominated the office locations with 4 of top 5 being in Asia, Hong Kong, Singapore, Tokyo, Seoul and Shanghai. Around 68 percent of international firms have office in Hong Kong.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the economies of the China and India have been growing rapidly, both with an average annual growth rate of more than 8%. Other recent very-high-growth nations in Asia include Israel, Malaysia, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Thailand, Vietnam, Mongolia, Uzbekistan, Cyprus and the Philippines, and mineral-rich nations such as Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Iran, Brunei, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Oman.
According to economic historian Angus Maddison in his book The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, India had the world's largest economy during 0 BCE and 1000 BCE. China was the largest and most advanced economy on earth for much of recorded history, until the British Empire (excluding India) overtook it in the mid-19th century. For several decades in the late twentieth century Japan was the largest economy in Asia and second-largest of any single nation in the world, after surpassing the Soviet Union (measured in net material product) in 1986 and Germany in 1968. (NB: A number of supernational economies are larger, such as the European Union (EU), the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) or APEC). This ended in 2010 when China overtook Japan to become the world's second largest economy.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Japan's GDP was almost as large (current exchange rate method) as that of the rest of Asia combined. In 1995, Japan's economy nearly equaled that of the USA as the largest economy in the world for a day, after the Japanese currency reached a record high of 79 yen/US$. Economic growth in Asia since World War II to the 1990s had been concentrated in Japan as well as the four regions of South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore located in the Pacific Rim, known as the Asian tigers, which have now all received developed country status, having the highest GDP per capita in Asia.

It is forecasted that India will overtake Japan in terms of nominal GDP by 2020. By 2027, according to Goldman Sachs, China will have the largest economy in the world. Several trade blocs exist, with the most developed being the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Asia is the largest continent in the world by a considerable margin, and it is rich in natural resources, such as petroleum, forests, fish, water, rice, copper and silver. Manufacturing in Asia has traditionally been strongest in East and Southeast Asia, particularly in China, Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, India, the Philippines, and Singapore. Japan and South Korea continue to dominate in the area of multinational corporations, but increasingly the PRC and India are making significant inroads. Many companies from Europe, North America, South Korea and Japan have operations in Asia's developing countries to take advantage of its abundant supply of cheap labour and relatively developed infrastructure.
According to Citigroup 9 of 11 Global Growth Generators countries came from Asia driven by population and income growth. They are Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Mongolia, Philippines, Sri Lanka and Vietnam. Asia has four main financial centers: Tokyo, Hong Kong, Singapore and Shanghai. Call centers and business process outsourcing (BPOs) are becoming major employers in India and the Philippines due to the availability of a large pool of highly skilled, English-speaking workers. The increased use of outsourcing has assisted the rise of India and the China as financial centers. Due to its large and extremely competitive information technology industry, India has become a major hub for outsourcing.
In 2010, Asia had 3.3 million millionaires (people with net worth over US$1 million excluding their homes), slightly below North America with 3.4 million millionaires. Last year Asia had toppled Europe. Citigroup in The Wealth Report 2012 stated that Asian centa-millionaire overtook North America's wealth for the first time as the world's "economic center of gravity" continued moving east. At the end of 2011, there were 18,000 Asian people mainly in Southeast Asia, China and Japan who have at least $100 million in disposable assets, while North America with 17,000 people and Western Europe with 14,000 people.


== Tourism ==

With growing Regional Tourism with domination of Chinese visitors, MasterCard has released Global Destination Cities Index 2013 with 10 of 20 are dominated by Asia and Pacific Region Cities and also for the first time a city of a country from Asia (Bangkok) set in the top-ranked with 15.98 international visitors.


== Demographics ==

East Asia had by far the strongest overall Human Development Index (HDI) improvement of any region in the world, nearly doubling average HDI attainment over the past 40 years, according to the report's analysis of health, education and income data. China, the second highest achiever in the world in terms of HDI improvement since 1970, is the only country on the "Top 10 Movers" list due to income rather than health or education achievements. Its per capita income increased a stunning 21-fold over the last four decades, also lifting hundreds of millions out of income poverty. Yet it was not among the region's top performers in improving school enrollment and life expectancy.Nepal, a South Asian country, emerges as one of the world's fastest movers since 1970 mainly due to health and education achievements. Its present life expectancy is 25 years longer than in the 1970s. More than four of every five children of school age in Nepal now attend primary school, compared to just one in five 40 years ago.
Japan and South Korea ranked highest among the countries grouped on the HDI (number 11 and 12 in the world, which are in the "very high human development" category), followed by Hong Kong (21) and Singapore (27). Afghanistan (155) ranked lowest amongst Asian countries out of the 169 countries assessed.


=== Languages ===

Asia is home to several language families and many language isolates. Most Asian countries have more than one language that is natively spoken. For instance, according to Ethnologue, more than 600 languages are spoken in Indonesia, more than 800 languages spoken in India, and more than 100 are spoken in the Philippines. China has many languages and dialects in different provinces.


=== Religions ===

Many of the world's major religions have their origins in Asia, including the five most practiced in the world (excluding irreligion), which are Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Chinese folk religion (classified as Confucianism and Taoism), and Buddhism respectively. Asian mythology is complex and diverse. The story of the Great Flood for example, as presented to Christians in the Old Testament in the narrative of Noah, is first found in Mesopotamian mythology, in the Epic of Gilgamesh. Hindu mythology tells about an Avatar of the God Vishnu in the form of a fish who warned Manu of a terrible flood. In ancient Chinese mythology, Shan Hai Jing, the Chinese ruler Da Yu, had to spend 10 years to control a deluge which swept out most of ancient China and was aided by the goddess Nwa who literally fixed the broken sky through which huge rains were pouring.


==== Abrahamic ====
The Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity, Islam and Bah' Faith originated in West Asia.
Judaism, the oldest of the Abrahamic faiths, is practiced primarily in Israel, the birthplace and historical homeland of the Hebrew nation which today consists equally of those Israelites who remained in Asia/North Africa and those who returned from diaspora in Europe, North America, and other regions, though sizable communities continue to live abroad. Jews are the predominant ethnic group in Israel (75.6%) numbering at about 6.1 million, although the levels of adherence to Jewish religion are unspecified. Outside of Israel there are small ancient communities of Jewish still live in Turkey (17,400), Azerbaijan (9,100), Iran (8,756), India (5,000) and Uzbekistan (4,000).
Christianity is a widespread religion in Asia with more than 286 million adherents according to Pew Research Center in 2010, and nearly 364 million according to Britannica Book of the Year 2014. constituting around 12.6% of the total population of Asia. In the Philippines and East Timor, Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion; it was introduced by the Spaniards and the Portuguese, respectively. In Armenia, Cyprus, Georgia and Asian Russia, Eastern Orthodoxy is the predominant religion. Various Christian denominations have adherents in portions of the Middle East, as well as China and India. Saint Thomas Christians in India trace their origins to the evangelistic activity of Thomas the Apostle in the 1st century.
Islam, which originated in Saudi Arabia, is the largest and most widely spread religion in Asia with at least 1 billion Muslims. With 12.7% of the world Muslim population, the country currently with the largest Muslim population in the world is Indonesia, followed by Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Iran and Turkey. Mecca, Medina and to a lesser extent Jerusalem are the holiest cities for Islam in all the world. These religious sites attract large numbers of devotees from all over the world, particularly during the Hajj and Umrah seasons. Iran is the largest Shi'a country and Pakistan has the largest Ahmadiyya population.
The Bah' Faith originated in Asia, in Iran (Persia), and spread from there to the Ottoman Empire, Central Asia, India, and Burma during the lifetime of Bah'u'llh. Since the middle of the 20th century, growth has particularly occurred in other Asian countries, because Bah' activities in many Muslim countries has been severely suppressed by authorities. Lotus Temple is a big Baha'i Temple in India.


==== Indian and East Asian religions ====

Almost all Asian religions have philosophical character and Asian philosophical traditions cover a large spectrum of philosophical thoughts and writings. Indian philosophy includes Hindu philosophy and Buddhist philosophy. They include elements of nonmaterial pursuits, whereas another school of thought from India, Crvka, preached the enjoyment of the material world. The religions of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism originated in India, South Asia. In East Asia, particularly in China and Japan, Confucianism, Taoism and Zen Buddhism took shape.
As of 2012, Hinduism has around 1.1 billion adherents. The faith represents around 25% of Asia's population and is the second largest religion in Asia. However, it is mostly concentrated in South Asia. Over 80% of the populations of both India and Nepal adhere to Hinduism, alongside significant communities in Bangladesh, Pakistan, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and Bali, Indonesia. Many overseas Indians in countries such as Burma, Singapore and Malaysia also adhere to Hinduism.
Buddhism has a great following in mainland Southeast Asia and East Asia. Buddhism is the religion of the majority of the populations of Cambodia (96%), Thailand (95%), Burma (80%89%), Japan (36%96%), Bhutan (75%84%), Sri Lanka (70%), Laos (60%67%) and Mongolia (53%93%). Large Buddhist populations also exist in Singapore (33%51%), Taiwan (35%93%), South Korea (23%50%), Malaysia (19%21%), Nepal (9%11%), Vietnam (10%75%), China (20%50%), North Korea (1.5%14%), and small communities in India and Bangladesh. In many Chinese communities, Mahayana Buddhism is easily syncretized with Taoism, thus exact religious statistics is difficult to obtain and may be understated or overstated. The Communist-governed countries of China, Vietnam and North Korea are officially atheist, thus the number of Buddhists and other religious adherents may be under-reported.
Jainism is found mainly in India and in oversea Indian communities such as the United States and Malaysia. Sikhism is found in Northern India and amongst overseas Indian communities in other parts of Asia, especially Southeast Asia. Confucianism is found predominantly in Mainland China, South Korea, Taiwan and in overseas Chinese populations. Taoism is found mainly in Mainland China, Taiwan, Malaysia and Singapore. Taoism is easily syncretized with Mahayana Buddhism for many Chinese, thus exact religious statistics is difficult to obtain and may be understated or overstated.


== Modern conflicts ==

Some of the events pivotal in the Asia territory related to the relationship with the outside world in the post-Second World War were:
The Korean War
The French-Indochina War
The Vietnam War
The IndonesiaMalaysia confrontation
The Sino-Vietnamese War
The Bangladesh Liberation War
The Yom Kippur War
The Iranian Revolution
The Soviet war in Afghanistan
The IranIraq War
The Indonesian occupation of East Timor
The Cambodian Killing Fields
The Insurgency in Laos
The Lebanese Civil War
The Sri Lankan Civil War
The Dissolution of the Soviet Union
The Gulf War
The Nepalese Civil War
The India-Pakistan Wars
The Nagorno-Karabakh War
The War in Afghanistan
The Iraq War
The 2006 Thai coup d'tat
The Burmese Civil War
The Saffron Revolution
The Arab Spring
The ArabIsraeli conflict
The Syrian Civil War
The Sino-Indian War
The 2014 Thai coup d'tat
The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant


== Culture ==


=== Nobel prizes ===

The polymath Rabindranath Tagore, a Bengali poet, dramatist, and writer from Santiniketan, now in West Bengal, India, became in 1913 the first Asian Nobel laureate. He won his Nobel Prize in Literature for notable impact his prose works and poetic thought had on English, French, and other national literatures of Europe and the Americas. He is also the writer of the national anthems of Bangladesh and India.
Other Asian writers who won Nobel Prize for literature include Yasunari Kawabata (Japan, 1968), Kenzabur e (Japan, 1994), Gao Xingjian (China, 2000), Orhan Pamuk (Turkey, 2006), and Mo Yan (China, 2012). Some may consider the American writer, Pearl S. Buck, an honorary Asian Nobel laureate, having spent considerable time in China as the daughter of missionaries, and based many of her novels, namely The Good Earth (1931) and The Mother (1933), as well as the biographies of her parents of their time in China, The Exile and Fighting Angel, all of which earned her the Literature prize in 1938.
Also, Mother Teresa of India and Shirin Ebadi of Iran were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their significant and pioneering efforts for democracy and human rights, especially for the rights of women and children. Ebadi is the first Iranian and the first Muslim woman to receive the prize. Another Nobel Peace Prize winner is Aung San Suu Kyi from Burma for her peaceful and non-violent struggle under a military dictatorship in Burma. She is a nonviolent pro-democracy activist and leader of the National League for Democracy in Burma (Myanmar) and a noted prisoner of conscience. She is a Buddhist and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991. Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for "his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China" on 8 October 2010. He is the first Chinese citizen to be awarded a Nobel Prize of any kind while residing in China. In 2014, Kailash Satyarthi from India and Malala Yousafzai from Pakistan were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize "for their struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education".
Sir C. V. Raman is the first Asian to get a Nobel prize in Sciences. He won the Nobel Prize in Physics "for his work on the scattering of light and for the discovery of the effect named after him".
Japan has won the most Nobel Prizes of any Asian nation with 24 followed by India which has won 13.
Amartya Sen, (born 3 November 1933) is an Indian economist who was awarded the 1998 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for his contributions to welfare economics and social choice theory, and for his interest in the problems of society's poorest members.
Other Asian Nobel Prize winners include Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Abdus Salam, Robert Aumann, Menachem Begin, Aaron Ciechanover, Avram Hershko, Daniel Kahneman, Shimon Peres, Yitzhak Rabin, Ada Yonath, Yasser Arafat, Jos Ramos-Horta and Bishop Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo of Timor Leste, Kim Dae-jung, and 13 Japanese scientists. Most of the said awardees are from Japan and Israel except for Chandrasekhar and Raman (India), Salam (Pakistan), Arafat (Palestinian Territories), Kim (South Korea), and Horta and Belo (Timor Leste).
In 2006, Dr. Muhammad Yunus of Bangladesh was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for the establishment of Grameen Bank, a community development bank that lends money to poor people, especially women in Bangladesh. Dr. Yunus received his PhD in economics from Vanderbilt University, United States. He is internationally known for the concept of micro credit which allows poor and destitute people with little or no collateral to borrow money. The borrowers typically pay back money within the specified period and the incidence of default is very low.
The Dalai Lama has received approximately eighty-four awards over his spiritual and political career. On 22 June 2006, he became one of only four people ever to be recognized with Honorary Citizenship by the Governor General of Canada. On 28 May 2005, he received the Christmas Humphreys Award from the Buddhist Society in the United Kingdom. Most notable was the Nobel Peace Prize, presented in Oslo, Norway on 10 December 1989.


== Political geography ==

Within the above-mentioned states are several partially recognized countries with limited to no international recognition. None of them are members of the UN:


== See also ==

References to articles:
Subregions of Asia
Special topics:
Asian Century
Asian cuisine
Asian furniture
Asian Games
Asian Monetary Unit
Asian people
Eastern world
Eurasia
Far East
East Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Central Asia
Fauna of Asia
Flags of Asia
Middle East
Eastern Mediterranean
Levant
Near East

Pan-Asianism
Lists:
List of cities in Asia
List of metropolitan areas in Asia by population
List of sovereign states and dependent territories in Asia


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Lewis, Martin W.; Wigen, Kren (1997). The myth of continents: a critique of metageography. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-20743-2. 
Ventris, Michael; Chadwick, John (1973). Documents in Mycenaean Greek (2nd ed.). Cambridge: University Press. 


== Further reading ==
Higham, Charles. Encyclopedia of Ancient Asian Civilizations. Facts on File library of world history. New York: Facts On File, 2004.
Kamal, Niraj. "Arise Asia: Respond to White Peril". New Delhi:Wordsmith,2002, ISBN 978-81-87412-08-3
Kapadia, Feroz, and Mandira Mukherjee. Encyclopaedia of Asian Culture and Society. New Delhi: Anmol Publications, 1999.
Levinson, David, and Karen Christensen. Encyclopedia of Modern Asia. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 2002.


== External links ==

"Display Maps". The Soil Maps of Asia. European Digital Archive of Soil Maps  EuDASM. Retrieved 26 July 2011. 
"Asia Maps". Perry-Castaeda Library Map Collection. University of Texas Libraries. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 20 July 2011. 
"Asia". Norman B. Leventhal Map Center at the Boston Public Library. Retrieved 26 July 2011. 
Bowring, Philip (12 February 1987). "What is Asia?". Eastern Economic Review. Columbia University Asia For Educators. 135 (7).Finance is a field that deals with the study of investments. It includes the dynamics of assets and liabilities over time under conditions of different degrees of uncertainty and risk. Finance can also be defined as the science of money management. Finance aims to price assets based on their risk level and their expected rate of return. Finance can be broken into three different sub-categories: public finance, corporate finance and personal finance.


== Areas of finance ==


=== Personal finance ===

Questions in personal finance revolve around:
Protection against unforeseen personal events, as well as events in the wider economies
Transference of family wealth across generations (bequests and inheritance)
Effects of tax policies (tax subsidies and/or penalties) on management of personal finances
Effects of credit on individual financial standing
Development of a savings plan or financing for large purchases (auto, education, home)
Planning a secure financial future in an environment of economic instability
Personal finance may involve paying for education, financing durable goods such as real estate and cars, buying insurance, e.g. health and property insurance, investing and saving for retirement.
Personal finance may also involve paying for a loan, or debt obligations. The six key areas of personal financial planning, as suggested by the Financial Planning Standards Board, are:
Financial position: is concerned with understanding the personal resources available by examining net worth and household cash flow. Net worth is a person's balance sheet, calculated by adding up all assets under that person's control, minus all liabilities of the household, at one point in time. Household cash flow totals up all the expected sources of income within a year, minus all expected expenses within the same year. From this analysis, the financial planner can determine to what degree and in what time the personal goals can be accomplished.
Adequate protection: the analysis of how to protect a household from unforeseen risks. These risks can be divided into the following: liability, property, death, disability, health and long term care. Some of these risks may be self-insurable, while most will require the purchase of an insurance contract. Determining how much insurance to get, at the most cost effective terms requires knowledge of the market for personal insurance. Business owners, professionals, athletes and entertainers require specialized insurance professionals to adequately protect themselves. Since insurance also enjoys some tax benefits, utilizing insurance investment products may be a critical piece of the overall investment planning.
Tax planning: typically the income tax is the single largest expense in a household. Managing taxes is not a question of if you will pay taxes, but when and how much. Government gives many incentives in the form of tax deductions and credits, which can be used to reduce the lifetime tax burden. Most modern governments use a progressive tax. Typically, as one's income grows, a higher marginal rate of tax must be paid. Understanding how to take advantage of the myriad tax breaks when planning one's personal finances can make a significant impact in which it can later save you money in the long term.
Investment and accumulation goals: planning how to accumulate enough money - for large purchases and life events - is what most people consider to be financial planning. Major reasons to accumulate assets include, purchasing a house or car, starting a business, paying for education expenses, and saving for retirement. Achieving these goals requires projecting what they will cost, and when you need to withdraw funds that will be necessary to be able to achieve these goals. A major risk to the household in achieving their accumulation goal is the rate of price increases over time, or inflation. Using net present value calculators, the financial planner will suggest a combination of asset earmarking and regular savings to be invested in a variety of investments. In order to overcome the rate of inflation, the investment portfolio has to get a higher rate of return, which typically will subject the portfolio to a number of risks. Managing these portfolio risks is most often accomplished using asset allocation, which seeks to diversify investment risk and opportunity. This asset allocation will prescribe a percentage allocation to be invested in stocks (either preferred stock and/or common stock), bonds (for example mutual bonds or government bonds, or corporate bonds), cash and alternative investments. The allocation should also take into consideration the personal risk profile of every investor, since risk attitudes vary from person to person.
Retirement planning is the process of understanding how much it costs to live at retirement, and coming up with a plan to distribute assets to meet any income shortfall. Methods for retirement plan include taking advantage of government allowed structures to manage tax liability including: individual (IRA) structures, or employer sponsored retirement plans.
Estate planning involves planning for the disposition of one's assets after death. Typically, there is a tax due to the state or federal government at one's death. Avoiding these taxes means that more of one's assets will be distributed to one's heirs. One can leave one's assets to family, friends or charitable groups.


=== Corporate finance ===

Corporate finance deals with the sources of funding and the capital structure of corporations, the actions that managers take to increase the value of the firm to the shareholders, and the tools and analysis used to allocate financial resources. Although it is in principle different from managerial finance which studies the financial management of all firms, rather than corporations alone, the main concepts in the study of corporate finance are applicable to the financial problems of all kinds of firms. Corporate finance generally involves balancing risk and profitability, while attempting to maximize an entity's assets, net incoming cash flow and the value of its stock, and generically entails three primary areas of capital resource allocation. In the first, "capital budgeting", management must choose which "projects" (if any) to undertake. The discipline of capital budgeting may employ standard business valuation techniques or even extend to real options valuation; see Financial modeling. The second, "sources of capital" relates to how these investments are to be funded: investment capital can be provided through different sources, such as by shareholders, in the form of equity (privately or via an initial public offering), creditors, often in the form of bonds, and the firm's operations (cash flow). Short-term funding or working capital is mostly provided by banks extending a line of credit. The balance between these elements forms the company's capital structure. The third, "the dividend policy", requires management to determine whether any unappropriated profit (excess cash) is to be retained for future investment / operational requirements, or instead to be distributed to shareholders, and if so, in what form. Short term financial management is often termed "working capital management", and relates to cash-, inventory- and debtors management.
Corporate finance also includes within its scope business valuation, stock investing, or investment management. An investment is an acquisition of an asset in the hope that it will maintain or increase its value over time that will in hope give back a higher rate of return when it comes to disbursing dividends. In investment management   in choosing a portfolio   one has to use financial analysis to determine what, how much and when to invest. To do this, a company must:
Identify relevant objectives and constraints: institution or individual goals, time horizon, risk aversion and tax considerations;
Identify the appropriate strategy: active versus passive hedging strategy
Measure the portfolio performance
Financial management overlaps with the financial function of the accounting profession. However, financial accounting is the reporting of historical financial information, while financial management is concerned with the allocation of capital resources to increase a firm's value to the shareholders and increase their rate of return on the investments.
Financial risk management, an element of corporate finance, is the practice of creating and protecting economic value in a firm by using financial instruments to manage exposure to risk, particularly credit risk and market risk. (Other risk types include foreign exchange, shape, volatility, sector, liquidity, inflation risks, etc.) It focuses on when and how to hedge using financial instruments; in this sense it overlaps with financial engineering. Similar to general risk management, financial risk management requires identifying its sources, measuring it (see: Risk measure: Well known risk measures), and formulating plans to address these, and can be qualitative and quantitative. In the banking sector worldwide, the Basel Accords are generally adopted by internationally active banks for tracking, reporting and exposing operational, credit and market risks.


==== Financial services ====

An entity whose income exceeds its expenditure can lend or invest the excess income to help that excess income produce more income in the future. Though on the other hand, an entity whose income is less than its expenditure can raise capital by borrowing or selling equity claims, decreasing its expenses, or increasing its income. The lender can find a borrowera financial intermediary such as a bankor buy notes or bonds (corporate bonds, government bonds, or mutual bonds) in the bond market. The lender receives interest, the borrower pays a higher interest than the lender receives, and the financial intermediary earns the difference for arranging the loan.
A bank aggregates the activities of many borrowers and lenders. A bank accepts deposits from lenders, on which it pays interest. The bank then lends these deposits to borrowers. Banks allow borrowers and lenders, of different sizes, to coordinate their activity.
Finance is used by individuals (personal finance), by governments (public finance), by businesses (corporate finance) and by a wide variety of other organizations such as schools and non-profit organizations. In general, the goals of each of the above activities are achieved through the use of appropriate financial instruments and methodologies, with consideration to their institutional setting.
Finance is one of the most important aspects of business management and includes analysis related to the use and acquisition of funds for the enterprise.
In corporate finance, a company's capital structure is the total mix of financing methods it uses to raise funds. One method is debt financing, which includes bank loans and bond sales. Another method is equity financing - the sale of stock by a company to investors, the original shareholders (they own a portion of the business) of a share. Ownership of a share gives the shareholder certain contractual rights and powers, which typically include the right to receive declared dividends and to vote the proxy on important matters (e.g., board elections). The owners of both bonds (either government bonds or corporate bonds) and stock (whether its preferred stock or common stock), may be institutional investors - financial institutions such as investment banks and pension funds  or private individuals, called private investors or retail investors.


=== Public finance ===

Public finance describes finance as related to sovereign states and sub-national entities (states/provinces, counties, municipalities, etc.) and related public entities (e.g. school districts) or agencies. It usually encompasses a long-term, strategic perspective regarding investment decisions that affect public entities. These long-term, strategic periods usually encompass five or more years. Public finance is primarily concerned with:
Identification of required expenditure of a public sector entity
Source(s) of that entity's revenue
The budgeting process
Debt issuance (municipal bonds) for public works projects
Central banks, such as the Federal Reserve System banks in the United States and Bank of England in the United Kingdom, are strong players in public finance, acting as lenders of last resort as well as strong influences on monetary and credit conditions in the economy.


== Capital ==

Capital, in the financial sense, is the money that gives the business the power to buy goods to be used in the production of other goods or the offering of a service. (The capital has two types of resources, Equity and Debt).
The deployment of capital is decided by the budget. This may include the objective of business, targets set, and results in financial terms, e.g., the target set for sale, resulting cost, growth, required investment to achieve the planned sales, and financing source for the investment.
A budget may be long term or short term. Long term budgets have a time horizon of 510 years giving a vision to the company; short term is an annual budget which is drawn to control and operate in that particular year.
Budgets will include proposed fixed asset requirements and how these expenditures will be financed. Capital budgets are often adjusted annually (done every year) and should be part of a longer-term Capital Improvements Plan.
A cash budget is also required. The working capital requirements of a business are monitored at all times to ensure that there are sufficient funds available to meet short-term expenses.
The cash budget is basically a detailed plan that shows all expected sources and uses of cash when it comes to spending it appropriately. The cash budget has the following six main sections:
Beginning Cash Balance - contains the last period's closing cash balance, in other words, the remaining cash from last years earnings.
Cash collections - includes all expected cash receipts (all sources of cash for the period considered, mainly sales)
Cash disbursements - lists all planned cash outflows for the period such as dividend, excluding interest payments on short-term loans, which appear in the financing section. All expenses that do not affect cash flow are excluded from this list (e.g. depreciation, amortization, etc.)
Cash excess or deficiency - a function of the cash needs and cash available. Cash needs are determined by the total cash disbursements plus the minimum cash balance required by company policy. If total cash available is less than cash needs, a deficiency exists.
Financing - discloses the planned borrowings and repayments of those planned borrowings, including interest.


== Financial theory ==


=== Financial economics ===

Financial economics is the branch of economics studying the interrelation of financial variables, such as prices, interest rates and shares, as opposed to goods and services. Financial economics concentrates on influences of real economic variables on financial ones, in contrast to pure finance. It centres on managing risk in the context of the financial markets, and the resultant economic and financial models. It essentially explores how rational investors would apply risk and return to the problem of an investment policy. Here, the twin assumptions of rationality and market efficiency lead to modern portfolio theory (the CAPM), and to the BlackScholes theory for option valuation; it further studies phenomena and models where these assumptions do not hold, or are extended. "Financial economics", at least formally, also considers investment under "certainty" (Fisher separation theorem, "theory of investment value", ModiglianiMiller theorem) and hence also contributes to corporate finance theory. Financial econometrics is the branch of financial economics that uses econometric techniques to parameterize the relationships suggested.
Although closely related, the disciplines of economics and finance are distinctive. The economy is a social institution that organizes a societys production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services, all of which must be financed.
Economists make a number of abstract assumptions for purposes of their analyses and predictions. They generally regard financial markets that function for the financial system as an efficient mechanism (Efficient-market hypothesis). Instead, financial markets are subject to human error and emotion. New research discloses the mischaracterization of investment safety and measures of financial products and markets so complex that their effects, especially under conditions of uncertainty, are impossible to predict. The study of finance is subsumed under economics as financial economics, but the scope, speed, power relations and practices of the financial system can uplift or cripple whole economies and the well-being of households, businesses and governing bodies within themsometimes in a single day.


=== Financial mathematics ===

Financial mathematics is a field of applied mathematics, concerned with financial markets. The subject has a close relationship with the discipline of financial economics, which is concerned with much of the underlying theory that is involved in financial mathematics. Generally, mathematical finance will derive, and extend, the mathematical or numerical models suggested by financial economics. In terms of practice, mathematical finance also overlaps heavily with the field of computational finance (also known as financial engineering). Arguably, these are largely synonymous, although the latter focuses on application, while the former focuses on modelling and derivation (see: Quantitative analyst). The field is largely focused on the modelling of derivatives, although other important subfields include insurance mathematics and quantitative portfolio problems. See Outline of finance: Mathematical tools; Outline of finance: Derivatives pricing.


=== Experimental finance ===

Experimental finance aims to establish different market settings and environments to observe experimentally and provide a lens through which science can analyze agents' behavior and the resulting characteristics of trading flows, information diffusion and aggregation, price setting mechanisms, and returns processes. Researchers in experimental finance can study to what extent existing financial economics theory makes valid predictions and therefore prove them, and attempt to discover new principles on which such theory can be extended and be applied to future financial decisions. Research may proceed by conducting trading simulations or by establishing and studying the behavior, and the way that these people act or react, of people in artificial competitive market-like settings.


=== Behavioral finance ===

Behavioral finance studies how the psychology of investors or managers affects financial decisions and markets when making a decision that can impact either negatively or positively on one of their areas. Behavioral finance has grown over the last few decades to become central and very important to finance.
Behavioral finance includes such topics as:
Empirical studies that demonstrate significant deviations from classical theories.
Models of how psychology affects and impacts trading and prices
Forecasting based on these methods.
Studies of experimental asset markets and use of models to forecast experiments.
A strand of behavioral finance has been dubbed Quantitative Behavioral Finance, which uses mathematical and statistical methodology to understand behavioral biases in conjunction with valuation. Some of this endeavor has been led by Gunduz Caginalp (Professor of Mathematics and Editor of Journal of Behavioral Finance during 2001-2004) and collaborators including Vernon Smith (2002 Nobel Laureate in Economics), David Porter, Don Balenovich, Vladimira Ilieva, Ahmet Duran). Studies by Jeff Madura, Ray Sturm and others have demonstrated significant behavioral effects in stocks and exchange traded funds. Among other topics, quantitative behavioral finance studies behavioral effects together with the non-classical assumption of the finiteness of assets.


=== Intangible asset finance ===

Intangible asset finance is the area of finance that deals with intangible assets such as patents, trademarks, goodwill, reputation, etc.
Intangible assets are divided into indefinite or definite. The brand name of a company is an indefinite asset; it stays with the company throughout its existence. A patent however, granted to that company for a limited amount of time would be a definite intangible asset.


== Professional qualifications ==
There are several related professional qualifications, that can lead to the field:
Generalist Finance qualifications:
Degrees: Master of Science in Finance (MSF), Master of Finance (M.Fin), Master of Financial Economics, Master of Applied Finance, Master of Liberal Arts in Finance (ALM.Fin)
Certifications: Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA), Certified Treasury Professional (CTP), Certified Valuation Analyst (CVA), Certified Patent Valuation Analyst (CPVA), Chartered Business Valuator (CBV), Certified International Investment Analyst (CIIA), Financial Risk Manager (FRM), Professional Risk Manager (PRM), Association of Corporate Treasurers (ACT), Certified Market Analyst (CMA/FAD) Dual Designation, Corporate Finance Qualification (CF), Chartered Alternative Investment Analyst (CAIA), Chartered Investment Manager (CIM)

Quantitative Finance qualifications: Master of Financial Engineering (MSFE), Master of Quantitative Finance (MQF), Master of Computational Finance (MCF), Master of Financial Mathematics (MFM), Certificate in Quantitative Finance (CQF).
Accountancy qualifications:
Qualified accountant: Chartered Certified Accountant (ACCA, UK certification), Chartered Accountant (ACA - England & Wales certification / CA - certification in Scotland and Commonwealth countries), Certified Public Accountant (CPA, US certification), ACMA/FCMA (Associate/Fellow Chartered Management Accountant) from Chartered Institute of Management Accountant (CIMA), UK.
Non-statutory qualifications: Chartered Cost Accountant CCA Designation from AAFM

Business qualifications: Master of Business Administration (MBA), Master of Management (MM), Master of Commerce (M.Comm), Master of Science in Management (MSM), Doctor of Business Administration (DBA)


== Unsolved problems in finance ==
As the debate to whether finance is an art or a science is still open, there have been recent efforts to organize a list of unsolved problems in finance.


== See also ==
Outline of finance
Financial crisis of 20072010
List of unsolved problems in finance


== References ==


== External links ==
Learn Finance Step by step with infographics tools
OECD work on financial markets Observation of UK Finance Market
Wharton Finance Knowledge Project - aimed to offer free access to finance knowledge for students, teachers, and self-learners.
Professor Aswath Damodaran (New York University Stern School of Business) - provides resources covering three areas in finance: corporate finance, valuation and investment management and syndicate finance.A system administrator, or sysadmin, is a person who is responsible for the upkeep, configuration, and reliable operation of computer systems; especially multi-user computers, such as servers.
The system administrator seeks to ensure that the uptime, performance, resources, and security of the computers he or she manages meet the needs of the users, without exceeding the budget.
To meet these needs, a system administrator may acquire, install, or upgrade computer components and software; provide routine automation; maintain security policies; troubleshoot; train or supervise staff; or offer technical support for projects.


== Related fields ==
Many organizations staff other jobs related to system administration. In a larger company, these may all be separate positions within a computer support or Information Services (IS) department. In a smaller group they may be shared by a few sysadmins, or even a single person.
A database administrator (DBA) maintains a database system, and is responsible for the integrity of the data and the efficiency and performance of the system.
A network administrator maintains network infrastructure such as switches and routers, and diagnoses problems with these or with the behavior of network-attached computers.
A security administrator is a specialist in computer and network security, including the administration of security devices such as firewalls, as well as consulting on general security measures.
A web administrator maintains web server services (such as Apache or IIS) that allow for internal or external access to web sites. Tasks include managing multiple sites, administering security, and configuring necessary components and software. Responsibilities may also include software change management.
A computer operator performs routine maintenance and upkeep, such as changing backup tapes or replacing failed drives in a redundant array of independent disks (RAID). Such tasks usually require physical presence in the room with the computer, and while less skilled than sysadmin tasks, may require a similar level of trust, since the operator has access to possibly sensitive data.


== Training ==

There are multiple paths to becoming a system administrator. Many system administrators have a degree in a related field: computer science, information technology, electronics engineering, computer engineering, information systems, or even a trade school program. On top of this, nowadays some companies require an IT certification. Other schools have offshoots of their Computer Science program specifically for system administration.
An alternate path to becoming a system administrator is to simply dive in without formal training, learning the systems they need to support, as they do other non-IT work. This is a common route for informally trained system administration, and is often the result in small organizations that lack IT departments but have gradually growing needs and complexities. For example, a shared desktop computer also acting as a file server becomes too slow for the needs of everyone, so someone decides to take on the job of setting up a dedicated server, and they learn the specific requirements to perform that task without formal training. This then spreads to other staff asking this person for help, and them finding solutions to those problems as needed, and them slowly becoming the generally relied-upon person to do systems management for the organization. These informally trained system administrators could be regarded as hackers, but they do their work in support of the needs of their organization and customers.
Some schools have started offering undergraduate degrees in System Administration. The first, Rochester Institute of Technology started in 1992. Others such as Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, University of New Hampshire, Marist College, and Drexel University have more recently offered degrees in Information Technology. Symbiosis Institute of Computer Studies and Research (SICSR) in Pune, India offers master's degree in Computers Applications with a specialization in System Administration. The University of South Carolina[5] offers an Integrated Information Technology B.S. degree specializing in Microsoft product support.
Several U.S. universities, including Rochester Institute of Technology, Tufts, Michigan Tech and Florida State University have graduate programs in system administration. In Norway, there is a special English-taught MSc program organized by Oslo University College in cooperation with Oslo University, named "Masters programme in Network and System Administration." There is also a "BSc in Network and System Administration" offered by Gjvik University College. University of Amsterdam (UvA) offers a similar program in cooperation with Hogeschool van Amsterdam (HvA) named "Master System and Network Engineering". Many schools in the world offer related graduate degrees in fields such as network systems and computer security.
One of the primary difficulties with teaching system administration as a formal university discipline is that the industry and technology changes much faster than the typical textbook and coursework certification process. By the time a new textbook has spent years working through approvals and committees, the specific technology for which it is written may have changed significantly or become obsolete.
In addition, because of the practical nature of system administration and the easy availability of open-source server software, many system administrators enter the field self-taught. Some learning institutions are reluctant to teach, what is in effect, hacking to undergraduate level students.
Generally, a prospective will be required to have some experience with the computer system they are expected to manage. In some cases, candidates are expected to possess industry certifications such as the Microsoft MCSA, MCSE, MCITP, Red Hat RHCE, Novell CNA, CNE, Cisco CCNA or CompTIA's A+ or Network+, Sun Certified SCNA, Linux Professional Institute, Linux Foundation Certified Engineer or Linux Foundation Certified System Administrator among others.
Sometimes, almost exclusively in smaller sites, the role of system administrator may be given to a skilled user in addition to or in replacement of his or her duties.


== Skills ==

The subject matter of system administration includes computer systems and the ways people use them in an organization. This entails a knowledge of operating systems and applications, as well as hardware and software troubleshooting, but also knowledge of the purposes for which people in the organization use the computers.
Perhaps the most important skill for a system administrator is problem solvingfrequently under various sorts of constraints and stress. The sysadmin is on call when a computer system goes down or malfunctions, and must be able to quickly and correctly diagnose what is wrong and how best to fix it. They may also need to have teamwork and communication skills; as well as being able to install and configure hardware and software.
System administrators are not software engineers or developers. It is not usually within their duties to design or write new application software. However, sysadmins must understand the behavior of software in order to deploy it and to troubleshoot problems, and generally know several programming languages used for scripting or automation of routine tasks.
Particularly when dealing with Internet-facing or business-critical systems, a sysadmin must have a strong grasp of computer security. This includes not merely deploying software patches, but also preventing break-ins and other security problems with preventive measures. In some organizations, computer security administration is a separate role responsible for overall security and the upkeep of firewalls and intrusion detection systems, but all sysadmins are generally responsible for the security of computer systems.


== Duties ==
A system administrator's responsibilities might include:
Analyzing system logs and identifying potential issues with computer systems.
Introducing and integrating new technologies into existing data center environments.
Performing routine audit of systems and software.
Applying operating system updates, patches, and configuration changes.
Installing and configuring new hardware and software.
Adding, removing, or updating user account information, resetting passwords,etc.
Answering technical queries and assisting users.
Responsibility for security.
Responsibility for documenting the configuration of the system.
Troubleshooting any reported problems.
System performance tuning.
Ensuring that the network infrastructure is up and running.
Configuring, adding, and deleting file systems.
In larger organizations, some of the tasks above may be divided among different system administrators or members of different organizational groups. For example, a dedicated individual(s) may apply all system upgrades, a Quality Assurance (QA) team may perform testing and validation, and one or more technical writers may be responsible for all technical documentation written for a company. System administrators, in larger organizations, tend not to be systems architects, systems engineers, or systems designers.
In smaller organizations, the system administrator might also act as technical support, Database Administrator, Network Administrator, Storage (SAN) Administrator or application analyst.


== See also ==

Application service management
Bastard Operator From Hell (BOFH)
DevOps
Forum administrator
Information technology operations
Large Installation System Administration Conference
League of Professional System Administrators
LISA (organization)
Professional certification (computer technology)
Superuser
Sysop
System Administrator Appreciation Day


== References ==
 This article incorporates public domain material from the United States Government document "Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2010-11 Edition" by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.


== Further reading ==
Essential Linux Administration (Cengage Press): A Comprehensive Guide for Beginners, 2011 by Chuck Easttom
Essential System Administration (O'Reilly), 3rd Edition, 2001, by leen Frisch
The Practice of System and Network Administration (Addison-Wesley), 2nd Edition (July 5, 2007), by Thomas A. Limoncelli, Christine Hogan and Strata R. Chalup
Principles of Network and System Administration (J. Wiley & Sons), 2000,2003(2ed), by Mark Burgess
Time Management for System Administrators (O'Reilly), 2005, by Thomas A. Limoncelli
UNIX and Linux System Administration Handbook (Prentice Hall), 4th Edition, 2010, by Evi Nemeth, Garth Snyder, Trent R. Hein, Ben WhaleyThe President of the State of Israel (Hebrew:  , Nesi HaMedina, lit. President of the State) is the head of state of Israel. The position is largely a ceremonial figurehead role, with executive power effectively being exercised by the prime minister. The current president is Reuven Rivlin, who took office on 24 July 2014. Presidents are elected by the Knesset for a seven-year term and are limited to a single term.


== Election ==
The president is elected by an absolute majority in the Knesset. If no candidate has received an absolute majority of votes by the first round of voting, a second round, in which only the two most-voted candidates in the first round may participate, is held. When electing the president, Knesset members vote by secret ballot. The president is elected to a term of seven years, and cannot be re-elected. Until 2000, the president was elected for a five-year term, and was allowed to serve up to two terms in office.
Any Israeli citizen who is a resident of the State is eligible to run for president. The office falls vacant upon completion of a term, resignation, or the decision of three-quarters of the Knesset to remove the president on grounds of misconduct or incapacity. Presidential tenure is not keyed to that of the Knesset in order to assure continuity in government and the nonpartisan character of the office. There is no vice president in the Israeli governmental system. If the president is temporarily incapacitated or leaves office, the speaker of the Knesset becomes acting president.
The first presidential election took place on 16 February 1949, and the winner was Chaim Weizmann. The second took place in 1951, as at the time presidential terms were linked to the length of the Knesset term (the first Knesset lasted only two years). Another election took place the following year after Weizmann's death.
Since then, elections have been held in 1957, 1962, 1963 (an early election following Yitzhak Ben-Zvi's death), 1968, 1973, 1978, 1983, 1988, 1993, 1998, 2000, 2007 and 2014. Six elections (1951, 1957, 1962, 1968, 1978 and 1988) have taken place with no opposition candidate, although a vote was still held.


== Powers and responsibilities ==
The powers of the President of Israel are generally equivalent to those held by heads of state in other parliamentary democracies and are largely dictated by Basic Law: The Presidency, which was passed in 1964. The Basic Law: The Government also includes sections on the powers of the president with reference to the government. The president signs every law (except those that pertain to the president's powers) and international or bilateral treaties approved by the Knesset. In addition, the president endorses the credentials of ambassadors and receives the credentials of foreign diplomats, appoints the Governor of the Bank of Israel, the State Comptroller upon recommendation of the Knesset House Committee, members of the Council on Higher Education, the National Academy of Science, the Broadcasting Authority, the Authority to Rehabilitate Prisoners, the Chief Rabbinical Council, the Wolf Foundation, the president of Magen David Adom, the president of the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities, and ceremonially appoints the Prime Minister. The president also has the power to pardon or commute the sentences of both soldiers and civilians, and ceremonially appoints judges to courts, including the Supreme Court, after appointment by the Judicial Selection Committee.
In addition, paragraph 29a of The Government basic law also states that the president must consent to the dissolution of the Knesset at the request of the Prime Minister when the government has lost its majority and can therefore no longer function effectively.
Presidential powers are usually exercised based on the recommendation of appropriate government ministers.
The president's most important role, in practice, is to help lead the process of forming a government. Since the Israeli electoral system makes it all but impossible for one party to govern alone, the president consults with party leaders to determine who is most likely to command a majority in the Knesset.


=== Other roles ===
The president awards the Israel Prize on Yom Ha'atzmaut and the Wolf Prize. The president also serves as the main speaker at the opening ceremonies of the half-yearly Knesset conference, as well as at the annual official ceremonies for Yom Hazikaron and Yom HaShoah.


== Presidential backgrounds ==
Most Israeli presidents were involved in national politics or Zionist activities before taking office. Some were also distinguished in other fields: for example, Chaim Weizmann was a leading research chemist who founded the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot; Zalman Shazar was an author, poet, and journalist; and Chaim Herzog was a military leader, attorney, and diplomat.
The first Israeli presidents were born in the former Russian Empire, which was true of much of the leadership in the early days of the state. The first native-born president, as well as the first with a Sephardi background, was Yitzhak Navon. The first president with a Western European background was Chaim Herzog, who originally came from Belfast, United Kingdom. The first president with a Mizrahi background was Moshe Katsav, who was born in Iran.


== Political affiliation ==
All Israeli presidents from Yitzhak Ben-Zvi to Ezer Weizman were members of, or associated with, the Labor Party and its predecessors, and have been considered politically moderate. Moshe Katsav was the first Likud president. These tendencies were especially significant in the April 1978 election of Labor's Yitzhak Navon, following the inability of the governing Likud coalition to elect its candidate to the presidency. Israeli observers believed that, in counterbalance to Prime Minister Menahem Begin's polarizing leadership, Navon, the country's first president of Sephardi origin, provided Israel with unifying symbolic leadership at a time of great political controversy and upheaval. In 1983 Navon decided to re-enter Labor politics after five years of nonpartisan service as president, and Chaim Herzog (previously head of military intelligence and Ambassador of Israel to the United Nations) succeeded him as Israel's sixth president. Likud's Moshe Katsav's victory over Labor's Shimon Peres in 2000 (by secret ballot) was an upset.
Albert Einstein, a Jew but not an Israeli citizen, was offered the presidency in 1952 but turned it down, stating "I am deeply moved by the offer from our State of Israel, and at once saddened and ashamed that I cannot accept it. All my life I have dealt with objective matters, hence I lack both the natural aptitude and the experience to deal properly with people and to exercise official functions". Ehud Olmert was reported to be considering offering the presidency to another non-Israeli, Elie Wiesel, but he was said to be "very not interested".


== List of Presidents of the State of Israel ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Basic Law: The President of the State Knesset websiteNRW.INVEST is the economic development agency of the German State of North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW). It deals with the acquisition of and support for foreign investors and the international marketing for NRW as a business location. As One-Stop-Agency for foreign investors, NRW.INVEST supports mainly international companies with their investment projects and settlements in NRW throughout the entire settlement process. NRW.INVEST maintains two subsidiaries in Japan and the United States as well as six representative offices in China, India, Korea, Poland, Russia and Turkey. The sole shareholder of NRW.INVEST is the State of North Rhine-Westphalia.
In 2010 the state economic development agency NRW.INVEST celebrated its 50th anniversary. When it was founded in 1960, the former Rheinisch-Westflische Industriefrderungsgesellschaft was commissioned by the state of North Rhine-Westphalia to recruit new industries to succeed the crisis-stricken mining industry.


== The Mission ==
As business location North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW) is in direct competition with the major European metropolitan regions Greater London, le-de-France, and West-Nederland as well as other strong business locations worldwide. Acknowledging the importance of foreign investments in times of globalization, NRW.INVEST aims to boost the location of foreign companies in NRW.


== Activities / Service ==
To promote NRW internationally as the business location in Europe, NRW.INVEST offers foreign investors an extensive service through all stages of the investment. In these concerns NRW.INVEST cooperates closely with the Federal State government and the regional institutions for economic development in NRW.
NRW.INVEST is set up in specialized country and industry teams that are experienced in all aspects of the location business.
The teams located at NRW.INVESTs headquarters in Dsseldorf, the capital of NRW, and the teams on site at the representative offices and subsidiaries provide comprehensive information about NRW as an investment location, describe important aspects of the state's economic structure and industry clusters, and give answers to tax-related and legal questions. Besides general information, NRW.INVEST provides potential investors with tailor-made information depending on their specific needs. On request, in-house experts analyze investors investment plans and find the right location for company settlements in NRW.
The database Germansite is an additional service for investors searching for a business location in NRW. Detailed geo-information of over 1,000 vacant commercial sites in NRW is available to the user, including the contact data of the respective contact person.
NRW.INVEST supports investors in practical issues such as visa applications as well as the entire licensing procedure that comes with a business set-up in NRW. The agency acts as a guide to the appropriate authorities and a mediator between the investor and the responsible institutions.
Investing in a new location does not stop after the initial set-up of the business. Further administrative processes are ongoing; a good share of the foreign companies in NRW start expanding and growing. Therefore, NRW.INVEST also offers aftercare services. With various series of events and a broad range of support and consulting services NRW.INVEST maintains continuous contact with investors in the State to ensure that they feel at home in North Rhine-Westphalia and can grow successfully here. In specific cases the team in Dsseldorf offers solution-oriented services by attending to investors questions and concerns regarding expansion investments, growth finance or administrative procedures.
Being a global organization NRW.INVEST cooperates with many international institutions. The agency is a member of organizations like the German-French Chamber of Industry and Commerce, the American Chamber of Commerce in Germany, ChemCologne, Chemsite, British Chamber of Commerce in Germany, the German-British Chamber of Industry and Commerce, and the Turkish-German Chamber of Industry and Commerce.


== Activities Abroad ==
Maintaining its head office in Dsseldorf, two subsidiaries, and eleven representative offices, NRW.INVEST is an international organization. The local staff at the subsidiaries and representative offices actively approach foreign companies in those areas where NRW is highly successful and attractive for foreign investments. They provide investors with first-hand information, practical advice for establishing business in NRW, and the necessary contacts. The offices abroad therefore often serve as the first link in the service chain of NRW.INVEST.
For the past two years NRW.INVEST has increased its activities abroad, particularly in the growth markets India and Turkey. The increasing inclusion of these nations in the world's economy is expected to bring about a significant rise in foreign investment. For this reason, the agency opened a branch office in the Indian city of Pune in the middle of 2007 and set up a representation in Istanbul in January 2008. The importance of the NRW.INVEST foreign offices is demonstrated by the example of Japan. Thanks to the representation in Tokyo and the intensive acquisition measures conducted there, NRW has developed into an important location for Japanese companies. More than 600 Japanese firms are now located in the state, earning Dsseldorf the nickname Little Tokyo. NRW.INVEST maintains further representative offices in Beijing, Nanjing, Shanghai, Chengdu, Guangzhou, Sichuan, Seoul, St. Petersburg, Moscow and Warsaw. Another subsidiary is based in Chicago.


== Foreign Direct Investments in NRW ==

North Rhine-Westphalia attracts companies from both Germany and abroad, 14 of the 50 German companies with the highest sales are based in NRW, including Bayer, Bertelsmann, Deutsche Post DHL, Deutsche Telekom, E.ON, Metro, Rewe, RWE and ThyssenKrupp. The state can rightly claim the most foreign direct investments (FDI) anywhere in Germany.
With 28.5 percent (189.8 billion euros) North Rhine-Westphalia recorded by far the highest direct investment share in Germany of all 16 federal states in 2014. More than 18,000 foreign companies from the most important investment countries control their German or European operations from bases in North Rhine-Westphalia. This means that almost a quarter of the foreign companies in Germany are domiciled in North Rhine-Westphalia. These include many international global players such as BP, 3M, Ericsson, Ford, LG Electronics, QVC, Sany, Toyota, and Vodafone. The companies employ a total of over 750,000 people.


== References ==


== External links ==

NRW.INVEST website
NRW.INVEST China
NRW.INVEST Japan
Germansite - database for geo-information of commercial sites in NRW
Ministry of Economic Affairs, Energy and Industry of the State of North Rhine-WestphaliaThe UMSL Student Government Association (SGA) is a student run government set up to provide a voice for students when dealing with administration of the University of MissouriSt. Louis (UMSL). SGA has three branches, executive, legislative and judicial, and also a constitution. SGA was started in 1963 when the University was founded and has been through many constitutional changes, the most recent in 2004. SGA includes members from every student organization and students from every college on campus. This government incorporates both undergraduate and graduate in its student body. UMSL's SGA, along with the 3 other campuses in the University of Missouri System student governments sends two members to a meeting of what is called the Intercampus Student Council. SGA has been involved in many changes for students around the campus, including getting funds for the Bentan Hall renovation. It is responsible for approving student fees before they go to the board of curators of the University of Missouri System and divides out the campus Activity's Fees to fund student organization's budgets.


== Mission ==
The Student Government Association works toward full student participation in all areas of university life, university affairs, and policy making. SGA serves as the student voice to the university administration, faculty, and other campuses. In addition, the SGA implements the philosophy that all students be encouraged to govern themselves and be responsible for their government. The Student Government Association works with the faculty and administration to create and maintain comprehensive and quality academic programs, student services, and activities which contribute to the total development of UM-St. Louis students, alumni, and the metropolitan, state, national, and international community.


== Executive Branch ==


=== Description ===
The Executive Branch of the Student Government Association consists of the President, Vice-President and Comptroller. It also includes all of the committees of the Assembly, which are as follows:
MSC Advisory Committee
Infrastructure and Fee Review
Parking, Transportation and Safety
Homecoming
Elections
Bylaws and Rules
Green(Recycling)


=== President ===
The President is elected by the entire student body. Responsibilities of the SGA President are to preside over the Executive Committee (which includes officers of the Assembly), hire any staff, hold a veto power and report to the Assembly about matters concerning the student body. The President also acts as a liaison to the Chancellor and the University Assembly.


=== Vice-President ===
The Vice-President is also elected by the entire student body. Responsibilities of the SGA Vice-President are to coordinate all of the committees in SGA while assisting the President. The Vice-President also serves as a member of the Inter-Campus Student Council (ISC) and is a member of the Executive committee.


=== Comptroller ===
The Comptroller is elected by the entire student body. Responsibilities of the SGA Comptroller are to act as a treasurer for SGA and serve as a chair of the Student Activities Budget Committee (SABC, which distributes money to student organizations). The Comptroller also selects members of SABC and represents the committee when needs be.


== Assembly ==


=== Description ===
The SGA Assembly is made up of member from every student organizations plus members at large from each college. The Assembly typically meets once a month and is responsible for voting on things ranging from student fees to Student Court members.


=== Chair ===
Responsibilities of the Assembly Chair are to lead every meeting of the Assembly. The Chair puts together the agenda for the meeting and is also a member of the Executive committee. The Chair also serves and interim Vice-President or Comptroller until an election can be held to replace the position. The Chair also serves as Vice-Chair and Ex-Offico member of the SABC (Student Activities Budget Committee).


=== Vice-Chair ===
Responsibilities of the Assembly Vice-Chair are to assume the duties of the chair or the Sergeant-at-Arms if they are absent. Also the Vice-Chair may vote in the Assembly and is a member of the Executive Committee. The Vice-Chair is to act as a liaison between the Assembly and the Executive Committee for the purpose of communication for all parties involved.


=== Parliamentarian ===
Responsibilities of the SGA Parliamentarian are to arbitrate parliamentary procedure questions during Assembly meetings and serve as a non-voting member of the Executive Committee and Assembly.


=== Sergeant-at-arms ===
Responsibilities of the SGA Sergeant-at-Arms are to maintain order at Assembly Meetings and take attendance at SGA Assembly meetings. The Sergeant-at-arms is also a member of the Executive Committee


=== Secretary ===
Responsibilities of the SGA Secretary are to coordinate all activities pertaining to the SGA. Also the Secretary keeps minutes of all Assembly meetings and meetings of the Executive Committee. The position may vote during meetings of the Assembly and is a member of the Executive Committee.


== Student Court ==


=== Description ===
The Student Government Association Student Court consists of seven justices, serving one-year terms. The terms will begin at the second Assembly meeting of the fall semester. Three nominees shall be nominated by the President and approved by the Assembly and four nominees shall be nominated by the Student Government Association Assembly. The nominees will be presented to the Student Government Association Assembly at the first SGA Assembly meeting and voted on individually at the next regularly scheduled meeting. If a justice resigns or is removed from office, the position shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled at the next Assembly meeting.


=== Responsibilities ===
The Student Court conducts hearings and reach decisions on student parking appeals along with hearing cases dealing with grievance between individual students and groups of students, groups of students, and conduct Impeachment proceedings. The Student Court also interprets the Student Government Association's Constitution and By-Laws, when requested by a member of the Association.


== Programs ==
SGA puts on a variety of programs including The Big Event, which is a service project. Also SGA holds Parking Town Hall meetings and Whine and Cheese, a place for student to come with concerns about the University.


== Accomplishments ==


=== University of Missouri name change ===
The University of Missouri (then called the University of Missouri-Columbia) wanted to change its name to simply the University of Missouri. This was opposed by the student body at UMSL and SGA lobbied the board of curators to keep Mizzou's name the same. A compromise was struck and now the University of Missouri-Columbia may only use University of Missouri under certain conditions.


=== Online Student Calendar ===
The master student calendar was started to give student organizations a place to post their events and give students a place to go and see what is happening on any given day. Go to http://sga.umsl.edu/calendar to see more.


=== Wayne Watch ===
A tradition started by the campus radio station, TheU, when they put a shirt on the statue of Wayne Goode, one of the founders of the UM-St. Louis campus. The tradition has been carried on by SGA this year. A shirt is placed on Wayne a few days before an event is to take place in order to promote it. So far Wayne has six shirts in his collection. Go to http://sga.umsl.edu/wayne to see more.


=== Homecoming 2007: Red and Gold Reign ===
Homecoming was a success this year. Overall, attendance and participation were up this year. There were 880 students who attended the dance and it sold out within 5 days. Attendance for all Spirit Week activities was up; many students came to the Blood Drive, Food Drive, and Karaoke. SGA Participated in ABC PresentsSteppin (their Annual Step Show) and there were 6 participants in the BMOC Competition. The Athletic Department participated this year and athletes were in attendance at every event. It was a success and they are currently looking for a new venue for 2008 and are in the process of naming the Co-Chairs.


=== Parking Rewards Program ===
SGA helped Parking and Transportation to start the students reward program. Students are entered into raffles for free parking permits as long as the student has registered the vehicle and received no tickets for the year. For more information log on to: http://www.umsl.edu/~asd/parkingandtransportation/


=== Readership Program ===
SGA advocated for a free newspaper service which is currently available to any student with a student ID. The papers include the New York Times, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, and the USA Today.


=== South Campus Dining ===
SGA, along with Residential Life, had been stressing the importance of dining on South campus and this year it paid off. Dining service will start at the beginning of the Spring 2008 semester. Check the SGA website later for times the dining hall will be open.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteInternational finance (also referred to as international monetary economics or international macroeconomics) is the branch of financial economics broadly concerned with monetary and macroeconomic interrelations between two or more countries. International finance examines the dynamics of the global financial system, international monetary systems, balance of payments, exchange rates, foreign direct investment, and how these topics relate to international trade.
Sometimes referred to as multinational finance, international finance is additionally concerned with matters of international financial management. Investors and multinational corporations must assess and manage international risks such as political risk and foreign exchange risk, including transaction exposure, economic exposure, and translation exposure.
Some examples of key concepts within international finance are the MundellFleming model, the optimum currency area theory, purchasing power parity, interest rate parity, and the international Fisher effect. Whereas the study of international trade makes use of mostly microeconomic concepts, international finance research investigates predominantly macroeconomic concepts.
What's Special about International Finance? Although we may be convinced of the importance of studying international finance, we still have to ask ourselves, what's special about international finance? Put another way, how is international finance different from purely domestic finance ( if such a thing exists)? Three major dimensions set international finance apart from domestic finance. They are:
Foreign exchange and political risks.
Market imperfection.
Expanded opportunity set.
These major dimensions of international finance largely stem from the fact that sovereign nations have the right and power to issue currencies, formulate their own economic policies, impose taxes, and regulate movement of people, goods, and capital across their borders.


== See alsoEdit ==
Finance
Global financial system
International economics
International monetary systems
International trade


== Notes and referencesEdit ==


== External linksEdit ==
Historical documents on international finance available on FRASERChennai (/tnna/; formerly known as Madras /mdrs/ or /-drs/) is the capital of the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. Located on the Coromandel Coast off the Bay of Bengal, it is one of the biggest cultural, economic and educational centres in South India. According to the 2011 Indian census, it is the fourth-largest city and fourth-most populous urban agglomeration in India. The city together with the adjoining regions constitute the Chennai Metropolitan Area, which is the 36th-largest urban area by population in the world. Chennai is one of the Indian cities most visited by foreign tourists, and is the 47th most visited city in the world. The Quality of Living Survey rated Chennai as the safest city in India. Chennai attracts 45 percent of health tourists visiting India, and 30 to 40 percent of domestic health tourists. As such, it is termed "India's health capital". As a growing metropolitan city in a developing country, Chennai confronts substantial pollution and other logistical and socio-economic problems
Chennai has the third-largest expatriate population in India at 35,000 in 2009, 82,790 in 2011 and estimated at over 100,000 by 2016. Tourism guide publisher Lonely Planet named Chennai as one of the top ten cities in the world to visit in 2015. Chennai is ranked as a beta-level city in the Global Cities Index  and was ranked the best city in India by India Today in the 2014 annual Indian city survey. In 2015 Chennai was named the "hottest" city (worth visiting, and worth living in for long term) by the BBC, citing the mixture of both modern and traditional values. National Geographic ranked Chennai's food as second best in the world; it was the only Indian city to feature in the list. Chennai was also named the ninth-best cosmopolitan city in the world by Lonely Planet.
In January 2015 the Chennai Metropolitan Area was ranked as the third-largest economy in India, with the third-highest GDP per capita. Chennai has been selected as one of the 100 Indian cities to be developed as a smart city under PM Narendra Modi's flagship Smart Cities Mission.


== Etymology ==

The nativity of 'Madras' of being Tamil origin and 'Chennai' of being Telugu origin has been clearly proven and documented after various researches done by renowned scholars and historians.
The name Madras originated even before the British presence was established in India. The name Madras is said to have originated from a Portuguese phrase " mae de Deus " which means "mother of god", due to Portuguese influence on the port city. According to some sources, Madras was derived from Madraspattinam, a fishing-village north of Fort St George. However, it is uncertain whether the name was in use before the arrival of Europeans. The British military mapmakers believed Madras was originally Mundir-raj or Mundiraj. Madras might have also been derived from the word Madhuras (Sanskrit: ) meaning "juice of honey" or "sugarcane" in Sanskrit. A Vijayanagar-era inscription dated to the year 1367 that mentions the port of Maadarasanpattanam, along with other small ports on the east coast was discovered in 2015 and it was theorised that the aforementioned port is the fishing port of Royapuram.
There are two different theories for the origin of the name Chennai. The first theory is that it was derived from the name of a Telugu ruler Damarla Chennappa Nayakudu, father of Damarla Venkatapathy Nayak, a Nayak ruler who served as a general under Venkata III of the Vijayanagar Empire from whom the British acquired the town in 1639. The first official use of the name Chennai is said to be in a sale deed, dated 8 August 1639, to Francis Day of the East India Company. The second theory states that it was named after the Chenna Kesava Perumal Temple; the temple regarded as the face of the city.
In 1996, the Government of Tamil Nadu officially changed the name from Madras to Chennai. At that time many Indian cities underwent a change of name. However, the name Madras continues in occasional use for the city, as well as for places named after the city such as University of Madras, IIT Madras, Madras Institute of Technology, Madras Medical College, Madras Christian College.


== History ==

Stone age implements have been found near Pallavaram in Chennai. According to the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Pallavaram was a megalithic cultural establishment, and pre-historic communities resided in the settlement.
The region around Chennai has served as an important administrative, military, and economic centre for many centuries. During 1st century CE, a poet and weaver named Thiruvalluvar lived in the town of Mylapore (a neighbourhood of present Chennai). From the 1st12th century the region of present Tamil Nadu and parts of South India was ruled by the Cholas.
The Pallavas of Kanchi built the areas of Mahabalipuram and Pallavaram during the reign of Mahendravarman I. They also defeated several kingdoms including the Cheras, Cholas and Pandyas who ruled over the area before their arrival. Sculpted caves and paintings have been identified from that period. Ancient coins dating to around 500 BC have also been unearthed from the city and its surrounding areas. A portion of these findings belonged to the Vijayanagara Empire, which ruled the region during the medieval period.
The Portuguese first arrived in 1522 and built a port called So Tom after the Christian apostle, St. Thomas, who is believed to have preached in the area between 52 and 70 CE. In 1612, the Dutch established themselves near Pulicat, north of Chennai.
On 22 August 1639, which is referred to as Madras Day, the English East India Company under Francis Day bought a small strip of land stretching 3 miles on the Coromandel Coast. They got a license to build a fort and a castle in the contracted region. The ruler Damarla Chennappa Nayakudu, the Nayaka of Chandragiri, granted the English permission to build a factory and warehouse for their trading enterprises. The region was then primarily a fishing village known as "Madraspatnam". A year later, the English built Fort St. George, the first major English settlement in India, which became the nucleus of the growing colonial city and urban Chennai, grew around this Fort. Post independence the fort housed the Tamil Nadu Assembly until the new Secretariat building was opened in 2010, but shortly afterwards it was again moved back to Fort St. George, due to a change in the Government.
In 1746, Fort St. George and Madras were captured by the French under General La Bourdonnais, the Governor of Mauritius, who plundered the town and its outlying villages. The British regained control in 1749 through the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle and strengthened the town's fortress wall to withstand further attacks from the French and Hyder Ali, the Sultan of Mysore. They resisted a French siege attempt in 1759 under the leadership of Eyre Coote. In 1769 the city was threatened by Mysore and the British were defeated by Hyder Ali, after which the Treaty of Madras ended the war. By the 18th century, the British had conquered most of the region around Tamil Nadu and the northern modernday states of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, establishing the Madras Presidency with Madras as the capital.
Gradually, the city grew into a major naval base and became the central administrative centre for the British in South India. With the advent of railways in India in the 19th century, the thriving urban centre was connected to other important cities such as Bombay and Calcutta, promoting increased communication and trade with the hinterland. Sir Arthur Lawley was Governor of Madras from 1906 to 1911 and promoted modern agriculture, industry, railways, education, the arts and more democratic governance. The Governor lived in Government House, Fort St George, and had a country home at Guindy, with access to a golf course, hockey pitches, riding stables and the Guindy Horse Racing Track. In the First World War as Red Cross Commissioner in Mesopotamia, he looked after the welfare of Indian soldiers. Madras was the only Indian city to be attacked by the Central Powers during World War I, when an oil depot was shelled by the German light cruiser SMS Emden on 22 September 1914, as it raided shipping lanes in the Indian Ocean, causing disruption to shipping.
After India gained its independence in 1947, the city became the capital of Madras State, which was renamed as Tamil Nadu in 1969. The violent agitations of 1965 against the compulsory imposition of Hindi and in support of English in India in the state marked a major shift in the political dynamics of the city and eventually it had a big impact on the whole state. Because of Madras and its people, English now exists in India, otherwise Hindi might have been made the sole official language in India. On 17 July 1996, the city known as Madras was officially renamed Chennai, in line with what was then a nationwide trend to using less Anglicised names. On 26 December 2004, an Indian Ocean tsunami lashed the shores of Chennai, killing 206 people in Chennai and permanently altering the coastline. The 2015 Chennai Floods submerged major portions of the city, killing 269 people and resulting in damages of 86.4 billion (US$1 billion).


== Environment ==


=== Geography ===

Chennai, sometimes referred to as the "Gateway to South India," is located on the southeastern coast of India in the northeastern part of Tamil Nadu on a flat coastal plain known as the Eastern Coastal Plains. Its average elevation is around 6.7 metres (22 ft), and its highest point is 60 m (200 ft). Two major rivers flow through Chennai, the Cooum River (or Koovam) through the centre and the Adyar River to the south. A third river, the Kortalaiyar, travels through the northern fringes of the city before draining into the Bay of Bengal, at Ennore. The estuary of this river is heavily polluted with effluents released by the industries in the region. Adyar and Cooum rivers are heavily polluted with effluents and waste from domestic and commercial sources, the Coumm being so heavily polluted it is regarded as the city's eyesore. A protected estuary on the Adyar forms a natural habitat for several species of birds and animals. The Buckingham Canal, 4 km (2.5 mi) inland, runs parallel to the coast, linking the two rivers. The Otteri Nullah, an eastwest stream, runs through north Chennai and meets the Buckingham Canal at Basin Bridge. Several lakes of varying size are located on the western fringes of the city. Some areas of the city have the problem of excess iron content in groundwater.

Chennai's soil is mostly clay, shale and sandstone. Clay underlies most of the city, chiefly Manali, Kolathur, Maduravoyal, K. K. Nagar, Tambaram, Mudichur, Pallavaram Semmencherry, Alapakkam, Vyasarpadi and Anna Nagar. Sandy areas are found along the river banks and coasts, and include areas such as Tiruvottiyur, George Town, Madhavaram, New Washermanpet, Chepauk, Mylapore, Porur, Adyar, Besant Nagar and Uthandi. In these areas, rainwater runoff percolates quickly through the soil. Areas having hard rock surface include Guindy, Nanganallur, Pallikaranai, Alandur, Jaladampet, Velachery, Adambakkam and a part of Saidapet and Perungudi. The ground water table in Chennai is at 4-5m below ground in most of the areas, which was considerably improved and maintained through the mandatory rain water harvesting system.


=== Geology ===
Chennai is classified as being in Seismic Zone III, indicating a moderate risk of damage from earthquakes. Owing to the geotectonic zone the city falls in, the city is considered a potential geothermal energy site. The crust has granite rocks indicating volcanic activities in the past. It is expected that temperatures of around 200 to 300 C will be available if the ground were drilled 4 to 5 km deep. The region has the oldest rocks in the country dating back to nearly a billion years.


=== Flora and fauna ===

The southern stretch of Chennai's coast from Tiruvanmiyur to Neelangarai are favoured by the endangered Olive Ridley sea turtles to lay eggs every winter. A large number of cattle egrets, pond herons and other waterbirds can be seen in the rivers of Cooum and Adyar. About 75,000 birds migrate to Chennai every year. Marshy wetlands such as Pallikaranai also play host to a number of migratory birds during the monsoon and winter. Over 300 species of birds have been recorded in the city and its neighbourhood by members of Madras Naturalists' Society since its inception in 1978.
Guindy National Park is a protected area within the city limits. Wildlife conservation and research activities take place at Arignar Anna Zoological Park including Olive ridley sea turtle conservation. Madras Crocodile Bank Trust is a herpetology research station, located 40 kilometres (25 mi) south of Chennai. It is India's leading institution for herpeto faunal conservation and the first crocodile breeding centre in Asia.


=== Environment conservation ===
Chennai has three rivers and many lakes spread across the city. Urbanization has led to shrinkage of water bodies and wetlands. The quantity of wetlands in the city has decreased from 650 to only 27 currently. The Chennai River Restoration trust set up by the government is working on the restoration of Adyar river. Environmentalist Foundation of India is a volunteering group working towards wildlife conservation and habitat restoration.


=== Climate ===
Chennai has a tropical wet and dry climate (Kppen: Aw). The city lies on the thermal equator and is also on the coast, which prevents extreme variation in seasonal temperature. The hottest part of the year is late May to early June, known regionally as Agni Nakshatram ("fire star") or as Kathiri Veyyil, with maximum temperatures around 3540 C (95104 F). The coolest part of the year is January, with minimum temperatures around 1925 C (6677 F). The lowest recorded temperature was 13.9 C (57.0 F) on 11 December 1895 and 29 January 1905. The highest recorded temperature was 45 C (113 F) on 31 May 2003. The average annual rainfall is about 140 cm (55 in).
The city gets most of its seasonal rainfall from the northeast monsoon winds, from midOctober to midDecember. Cyclones in the Bay of Bengal sometimes hit the city. The highest annual rainfall recorded is 257 cm (101 in) in 2005. Prevailing winds in Chennai are usually southwesterly between April and October and north-easterly during the rest of the year. Historically, Chennai has relied on the annual rains of the monsoon season to replenish water reservoirs, as no major rivers flow through the area. Chennai has a water table at 2 metres for 60 percent of the year.


== Administration ==

Chennai city is governed by the Greater Chennai Corporation (formerly "Corporation of Madras"), which was established in 1688. It is the oldest surviving municipal corporation in India and the second oldest surviving corporation in the world. In 2011, the jurisdiction of the Chennai Corporation was expanded from 174 km2 (67 sq mi) to an area of 426 km2 (164 sq mi), dividing into three regionsNorth, South and Central, which covers 200 wards. The corporation is headed by a mayor, an office presently occupied by Saidai Sa. Duraisamy. The Mayor and councillors of the city are elected through a popular vote by the residents. While the city limit was expanded in 2011, the revised population is yet to be officially announced.
The Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority (CMDA) is the nodal agency responsible for planning and development of Chennai Metropolitan Area, which is spread over an area of 1,189 km2 (459 sq mi), covering the Chennai district and parts of Tiruvallur and Kanchipuram districts. The larger suburbs are governed by town municipalities and the smaller ones are governed by town councils called panchayats. Under the gamut of the CMDA are 5 parliamentary and 28 assembly constituencies. The CMDA has drafted an additional Master Plan that aims to develop satellite townships around the city. The city's contiguous satellite towns include Mahabalipuram in the south, Chengalpattu and Maraimalai Nagar in the southwest, and Sriperumpudur, Arakkonam, Kanchipuram and Tiruvallur to the west.
Chennai, as the capital of the state of Tamil Nadu, houses the state executive and legislative headquarters primarily in the Secretariat Buildings in the Fort St George campus. The Madras High Court, is the highest judicial authority in the state, whose jurisdiction extends across Tamil Nadu and Puducherry. Chennai has three parliamentary constituenciesChennai North, Chennai Central and Chennai Southand elects 16 Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) to the state legislature.


=== Law and order ===

The Greater Chennai Police is the main law enforcement agency in the city, with a jurisdiction of over 745 km2 (288 sq mi) catering to over 85 lakh people. It consists of 121 Police stations and is headed by a commissioner of police. The Greater Chennai Police is a division of the Tamil Nadu Police, and the administrative control lies with the Tamil Nadu Home Ministry. Chennai City Traffic Police (CCTP) is responsible for the traffic management in the city. The metropolitan suburbs are policed by the Chennai Metropolitan Police, headed by the Chennai Police Commissionerate, and the outer district areas of the CMDA are policed by the Kanchipuram and Thiruvallur police departments.

As of 2011 (prior to the expansion of Chennai Corporation area), Chennai city has a sanctioned strength of 14,000 police personnel. With a population density of 26,903 persons per square kilometre, the city had 1 policeman for every 413 people. The Chennai suburban police had about 4,093 police personnel and a ratio of 1:1,222. In 2010, the crime rate in the city was 169.2 per 100,000 people, as against an average of 341.9 in the 35 major cities of India. In 2011, North Chennai zone had 30 police stations and 3 police out posts, Central Chennai zone had 28 police stations and 3 police out posts, and South Chennai zone had 30 police stations.
In 2009, Chennai Central Prison, one of the oldest prisons in India, built over 11 acres (4 ha) of land, was demolished; the prisoners were moved to Puzhal Central Prison.


=== Politics ===
Since the 19th century, when Western scholars proposed that Dravidian languages, which dominated the southern region of India, formed a different linguistic group to that of the Indo-Aryan languages that are predominant in the north of the subcontinent, the aspects of Tamil nationalism gained prominence. This resulted in the Anti-Hindi agitations in the city and across the state. However, the post-Independence re-organisation of Indian states according to linguistic and ethnic basis has moderated Tamil nationalism, especially the demand for separation from the Indian Union. The Anti-Hindi agitations in mid-1960s made the DMK more popular and more powerful political force in the state. The agitations of the 1960s played a crucial role in the defeat of the Tamil Nadu Congress party in the 1967 elections and the continuing dominance of Dravidian parties in Tamil Nadu politics.

Being the capital of the Madras Province that covered a vast area of the Deccan region, Chennai remained the centre of politics in the southern region of India during the British colonial era. After Independence, it remained the centre of political activities of the state of Tamil Nadu. Chennai is the birthplace of the idea of the Indian National Congress, commonly known as the Congress Party. Founded by Indian and British members of the Theosophical Society movement, most notably A.O. Hume, the idea was originally conceived in a private meeting of 17 men after a Theosophical Convention held in the city in December 1884. During the first 50 years of the Indian National Congress, the city played host to its conferences seven times in 1887, 1894, 1898, 1903, 1908, 1914 and 1927, becoming one of the strong bases for the Indian independence movement. After independence, the city hosted the Congress in 1955 in its suburb of Avadi.
Chennai is also the birthplace of several regional political movements since the British era. South Indian Welfare Association, one of the earliest regional parties, was founded in 1916, which later came to be known as the Justice Party, which was the main opposition party to the Indian National Congress in the state. In 1944, the party was renamed Dravidar Kazhagam (DK) by E. V. Ramasami (popularly known as 'Periyar'). The party was a non-political party that demanded the establishment of an independent state called Dravida Nadu. However, due to the differences between its two leaders Periyar and C. N. Annadurai, the party was split. Annadurai left the party to form the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK). The DMK decided to enter into politics in 1956.


=== Utility services ===

The city's water supply and sewage treatment are managed by the Chennai MetroWater Supply and Sewage Board. Water is drawn from Red Hills Lake and Chembarambakkam Lake, the primary water reservoirs of the city, and treated at water treatment plants located at Kilpauk, Puzhal, Chembarambakkam and supplied to the city through 27 water distribution stations. The city receives 530 mld of water from Krishna River through Telugu Ganga project, 180 mld of water from the Veeranam lake project and 100 mld of water from the Minjur desalination plant, the country's largest sea water desalination plant. However, Chennai is predicted to face a huge deficit of 713 million litres per day (MLD) in 2026 as the demand is projected at 2,248 MLD and supply estimated at only 1,535 MLD. The city's sewer system was designed in 1910, with some modifications in 1958. There are 714 public toilets in the city managed by the city corporation, and 2,000 more have been planned by the corporation. The corporation also owns 52 community halls across the city.
The Corporation of Chennai provides civic services to the city. Garbage collection in some of the wards is contracted to Ramky Enviro Engineers Limited, a private company, while the Corporation looks after the removal and processing of solid waste in the others, with a superintendent engineer managing the channels. As of 2011, 8 transfer stations exist within the city for treating the waste. Garbage is dumped in two dump-yards in the cityOne in Kodungaiyur and another in Perungudi, with a major portion of the latter covering the Pallikaranai marshland. In market areas, the conservancy work is done during the night. Electricity is distributed by the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board. Fire services are handled by the Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services. The city, along with the suburbs, has 33 operating fire stations.


== Architecture ==

With the history of many neighbourhoods of the city such as Mylapore and Triplicane antedating that of the city, the architecture of Chennai ranges in a wide chronology. The oldest buildings in the city dates from the 7th and 8th centuries CE, which include the Kapaleeshwarar Temple in Mylapore and the Parthasarathy Temple in Triplicane, built in the Dravidian architecture. This architecture includes various styles, such as those of the Pallavas, the Cholas, and the Vijayanagara empires. The associated Agraharam architecture, which consists of traditional row houses surrounding a temple, can still be seen in these areas. The heritage temples at Mamallapuram at the outskirts of the city are some of the examples of the Pallava architecture. Chennai ranks second to Kolkata of Indian heritage buildings.
With the advent of the Mugals and the British, the city saw a rise in a blend of Hindu, Islamic and Gothic revival styles, resulting in the distinct Indo-Saracenic style. The architecture for several early institutions such as banking and commerce, railways, press and education, chiefly through the colonial rule, followed the earlier directions of the Neo-Classical and the Indo-Saracenic. The Chepauk Palace in the city, designed by Paul Benfield, is said to be the first Indo-Saracenic building in India. Since then, many of the colonial-era buildings in the city were designed in this style of architecture, which is most apparent around the Fort St. George built in 1640. Most of these were designed by English architects Robert Fellowes Chisholm and Henry Irwin. The best examples of this style include the Madras High Court (built in 1892), Southern Railway headquarters, Ripon Building, Government Museum, Senate House of the University of Madras, Amir Mahal, Bharat Insurance Building, Victoria Public Hall and the College of Engineering.

The Triumph of Labour, also known as the Labour statue, is a statue at the Marina Beach, Chennai, India. Erected at the northern end of the beach at the Anna Square opposite University of Madras, it is an important landmark of Chennai.The statue shows four men toiling to move a rock, depicting the hard work of the labouring class.It was sculpted by Debi Prasad Roy Chowdhry.
The construction of the National Art Gallery in Madras was completed in 1909. The new building, with a stunning faade, was built of pink sandstone brought from Sathyavedu, and formed part of the Madras Museum campus. It was opened, on 23 January 1909, by the Governor of Fort St. George, Sir Arthur Lawley, and called the Victoria Memorial Hall after the Queen-Empress Victoria. The residential architecture in the city was based on the bungalow or the continuous row house prototypes. Gothic revival style buildings include the Chennai Central and Chennai Egmore railway stations. The Santhome Church, which was originally built by the Portuguese in 1523 and is believed to house the remains of the apostle St. Thomas, was rebuilt in 1893 in neo-Gothic style.
By the early 20th century, the art deco too made its entry upon the city's urban landscape. From the 1930s onwards, many buildings in George Town were built in this style, including the United India building (presently housing LIC) and the Burma Shell building (presently the Chennai House), both built in the 1930s, and the Dare House, built in 1940. Other examples include the Bombay Mutual building (presently housing LIC) and the South Indian Chamber of Commerce building. After Independence, the city witnessed a rise in the Modernism style of architecture. The completion of the LIC Building in 1959, the tallest building in the country at that time, marked the transition from lime-and-brick construction to concrete columns in the region. The presence of the weather radar at the Chennai Port, however, prohibited the construction of buildings taller than 60 m around a radius of 10 km. In addition, the floor-area ratio (FAR) in the central business district is also 1.5, much less than that of smaller cities of the country. This resulted in the city expanding horizontally, unlike other metropolitan cities where vertical growth is prominent. On the contrary, the peripheral regions, especially on the southern and south-western sides, are experiencing vertical growth with the construction of buildings up to 60 floors.


== Demographics ==

A resident of Chennai is called a Chennaite. According to 2011 census, the city had a population of 4,646,732, with in the area administered by the Municipal Corporation; that had 11 lakh households, with 51% of them living in rented houses. The city's limits were expanded later in 2011 and its population reached 7,088,000. with Chennai Municipal Corporation being renamed as Greater Chennai Corporation.
Tamils form the majority of Chennai's population. English is spoken largely by white-collar workers, often mixed into Tamil. In 2001, out of the 2,937,000 migrants (33.8% of its population) in the city, 61.5% were from other parts of the state, 33.8% were from rest of India and 3.7% were from outside the country. As per the 2001 census, the number of speakers mother tongue wise are as follows, Tamil is spoken by 3,424,107 (78.83%), followed by Telugu by 419,209 (9.65%), Urdu by 180,245 (4.1%), Malayalam by 113,828 (2.6%), Hindi by 104,084 (2.39%), and Kannada by 22,250 (0.5%).
Chennai, along with Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata, is one of the few Indian cities that are home to a diverse population of ethno-religious communities. Minorities include Telugus, Marwaris, Gujaratis, Parsis, Sindhis, Odias, Goans, Kannadigas, Anglo-Indians, Bengalis, Punjabi, and Malayalees. As per the religious census of 2011, Chennai had 80.73% Hindus, 9.45% Muslims, 7.72% Christians, 0.06% Sikhs, 0.06% Buddhists, 1.11% Jains, 0.83% following other religions and 0.04% following no religion or did not indicate any religious preference.


== Housing ==

In a 2013 survey titled 'Emerging trends in real estate in Asia Pacific 2014', Chennai emerged in the top 25 real estate destinations list in the Asia Pacific region. The city ranked 22nd in the list. There are about 1,240 slums in Chennai home to about 9 lakh people.
Per 2011 census, there are 1.1 million households in the city and the residential housing stock available is 1,150,000  a surplus of about 50,000 houses. About 43,700 of them are kept vacant. In the suburbs of Chennai located in Tiruvallur and Kancheepuram districts, the figures of vacant houses 56,000 and 71,000, respectively. Of the existing housing stock in the city, about 200,000 houses are not in good condition, necessitating either to rebuild or build new units. About 26,000 households live in houses without any room and another 427,000 families (with an average size of five members) live in small dwelling units with only one room. An earlier estimate shows that there is a need to generate about 420,000 units for low-income groups by 2016.
As of 2012, an estimated population of 11,116 (0.16 percent) were homeless. Per Supreme Court guidelines, the city needs 65 shelters for the homeless. However, it has only 15, of which 8 are functioning and two are under renovation.


== Arts and culture ==


=== Museums and art galleries ===

Chennai is home to many museums, galleries, and other institutions, many of which are free of admission charges and are major tourist attractions as well as playing a research role. The city also has one of the oldest Museum and Art Gallery in the country- Government Museum, Chennai and The National Art Gallery (Chennai), established in the early 18th century. The city also hosts two art festivals annually. The "Fort Museum" inside the premises of Fort St. George is an important museum having a noteworthy collection of objects of the British era in its collection. The museum is managed by the Archaeological Survey of India and has in its possession, the first Flag of India hoisted at Fort St George after the declaration of India's Independence on 15 August 1947.


=== Music and performing arts ===

Chennai is a major centre for music, art and culture in India. The city is known for its classical dance shows. In 1930, for the first time in India, Madras University introduced a course of music, as part of the Bachelor of Arts curriculum. The Madras Music Season, initiated by Madras Music Academy in 1927, is celebrated every year during the month of December. It features performances of traditional Carnatic music by many artists in and around the city.
An arts festival called the Chennai Sangamam, which showcases not only various arts of Tamil Nadu but also from the neighbouring states, like kalari (from Kerala), which is a major attraction, is held in January every year. The Speciality of Chennai Sangamam is that the various programmes are held near or at the various famous landmarks in the city so that everyone in the city has access to the programmes and there is no fee charged for entry for any of the programmes. Pookolam, a form of art that uses coloured flour to create patterns and designs, comes from Kerala, but can be seen in abundance at the time of Onam.
The city has a diverse theatre scene and is one of the important centres for Bharata Natyam, a classical dance form that originated in Tamil Nadu and is the oldest dance of India. An important cultural centre for Bharata Natyam is Kalakshetra, on the beach in the south of the city. In 2012, a group of five Bharatha Natyam dancers from Chennai performed at the India Campaign during the 2012 Summer Olympics. Chennai is also home to some choirs, who during the Christmas season stage various carol performances across the city in Tamil and English.


== Cityscape ==

Madras is divided into four broad regions: North, Central, South and West. North Madras is primarily an industrial area. South Madras and West Madras, previously mostly residential, are fast becoming commercial, home to a growing number of information technology firms, financial companies and call centres. The city is expanding quickly along the Old Mahabalipuram Road and the Grand Southern Trunk Road (GST Road) in the south and towards Ambattur, Koyambedu and Sriperumbdur in the west. Central Madras comprises residential elements, but is primarily home to the downtown area, and surrounding areas, the most visited by travellers to the city. The financial district is also located here.


=== Tourism and hospitality ===

With temples, beaches and centres of historical and cultural significance, including the UNESCO Heritage Site of Mahabalipuram, Chennai is one of the most visited cities in India. The city serves as the gateway to the southern part of India with tourists landing in the city and starting their trip to the rest of the region. Chennai was the most visited Indian city by foreign tourists in 2009 and issued the third highest number of visas on arrival in 2014. In 2011, Chennai was ranked 41st in global top 100 city destination ranking, with 3,174,500 tourists, a 14 percent increase from 2010. About 830,620 domestic tourists arrived in Chennai in March 2011. Top foreign nationals visiting the city include those from Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Singapore, United Kingdom, France and United States. As of 2012, the city had 21 luxury five-star hotels with over 4,500 rooms in the inventory.


=== Entertainment ===

Chennai is the base for the Tamil film industry, known as Kollywood. Many film personalities have gone on to become politicians including C.N.Annadurai, M. Karunanidhi, M.G. Ramachandran and J. Jayalalithaa. Chennai hosts major film studios, including AVM Productions, the oldest surviving studio in India. As of 2012, there are 120 cinema screens and multiplexes. Major multiplexes include Sathyam Cinemas, Escape cinemas, Devi, Abirami complex and Mayajaal. Chennai's expansive theatre network stages many Tamil plays of many genres: political satire, slapstick comedy, history, mythology and drama. English plays are popular in the city, along with the more common Tamil-language plays.


=== Recreation ===

Zoo, beaches, and wildlife parks form the primary recreation areas of the city. Chennai has a total coast length of more than 19 km. Marina Beach runs for 6 km (3.7 mi), spanning along the shoreline of the city between the deltas of Cooum and Adyar, and is the second longest urban beach in the world. Elliot's Beach lies south of the Adyar delta. Covelong beach lies along the coromandal coast.

Madras Crocodile Bank Trust is a reptile zoo located 40 kilometres (25 mi) south of the city covering an area of 8.5 acres (3.4 ha) and had over 450,000 visitors in 2007. The center has one of the world's largest collections of reptiles and has bred 14 of the 23 existing species of crocodiles and alligators. The Arignar Anna Zoological Park, one of the largest zoological parks in the world, attracts nearly 20 lakh visitors per year. The city boasts two popular beaches, the Marina and Elliot's. Guindy National Park, a protected area of Tamil Nadu, has a children's park and a snake park, which gained statutory recognition as a medium zoo from the Central Zoo Authority of India in 1995. Chennai is one of the few cities in the world that accommodates a national park, the Guindy National Park, within its limits. The city has an estimated 4.5 percent of its area under green cover. This enables Chennai residents to go birding. The seven zones of the old corporation limits has about 260 parks, many of which suffer poor maintenance. The city has a per capita park space of 0.41 sq m, which is the least among all metros in India. The eight zones in the newly added areas of the city have about 265 locations that have been identified for development of new parks. The largest among the parks is the 358-acre Tholkappia Poonga, developed to restore the fragile ecosystem of the Adyar estuary. The horticulture department-owned Semmozhi Poonga is a 20-acre botanical garden located in the downtown.
Chennai houses several theme parks, namely MGM Dizzee World and Queens Land. The safety of several amusement parks has been questioned after several fatal accidents occurred. Wonderla is planning to open an amusement park in 2017. Other important recreation centres include Madras Boat Club, which is over 140 years old, and Gymkhana Club, which is famous for its 18-hole golf courses. Built in 1867, Madras Boat Club is the second oldest surviving Indian rowing club.


=== Shopping ===

Chennai is home to several malls, due to its status as an IT hub. Major ones include Express Avenue (EA), Citi Centre, Spencer Plaza, Ampa Skywalk, Phoenix Market City and Forum Vijaya Mall. Chennai is an important gold market in India contributing to 45 percent of the 800-tonne annual national gold uptake. The city is also the base to the World Gold Council's India operations. The city's retail industry is majorly concentrated in T. Nagar which accounts for major share jewellery and clothes sold in Chennai. According to the 2012 report by property consultant Cushman & Wakefield, Main Streets Across the World, Khader Nawaz Khan Road at Nungambakkam ranked 10th position in the list of 'Top 10 Global Highest Retail Rental Growth Markets 2012', with 36.7 percent jump in rents.


== Economy ==

Chennai's economy of US$58.6 billion PPP (US$17 billion nominal GDP, 2010) is currently rated the third-largest economy in India. Chennai has a broad industrial base in the automobile, computer, technology, hardware manufacturing and healthcare sectors. As of 2012, the city is India's second largest exporter of information technology (IT) and business process outsourcing (BPO) services. A major part of India's automobile industry is based in and around the city thus earning it the nickname "Detroit of India". It is known as the Cultural Capital of South India  and is the most visited city in India by international tourists according to Euromonitor. The city also serves as the location of the Madras Stock Exchange, India's fourth stock exchange, one of four permanently recognised by SEBI, and India's third-largest by trading volume, ranked behind the Bombay Stock Exchange and the National Stock Exchange of India.
Industrialisation in the city dates back to the 16th century, when textile mills manufactured goods which were exported to British during its war with France. According to Forbes magazine, Chennai is one of the fastest growing cities in the world and is rated in the "Forbes-Top 10 Fastest Growing Cities in the World". It is ranked 4th in hosting the maximum number of Fortune 500 companies of India, next only to Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata. It also is home to 24 Indian companies having a net worth of more than US$1 billion. As of 2012, the city has about 34,260 identified companies in its 15 zones, of which 5,196 companies have a paid-up the capital of over  50 lakh.
Chennai has a diversified economic base anchored by the automobile, software services, hardware manufacturing, health care and financial services industries. According to the Confederation of Indian Industry, Chennai is estimated to grow to a US$100billion economy, 2.5 times its present size, by the year 2025. As of 2012, with  1 lakh crore investment in the pipeline over 5 years, the city is poised for major industrial investment. Chennai is classified as a global city by GaWC, with a ranking of Beta based on the extent of global reach and financial influence.
The city is base to around 40 percent of India's automobile industry and 45 percent of auto components industry. A large number of automotive companies including Hyundai, Renault, Robert Bosch, Nissan Motors, Ashok Leyland, Daimler AG, Caterpillar Inc., Komatsu Limited, Ford, BMW and Mitsubishi have manufacturing plants in Chennai. The Heavy Vehicles Factory at Avadi produces military vehicles, including India's main battle tank: Arjun MBT. The Integral Coach Factory manufactures railway coaches and other rolling stock for Indian Railways. The AmbatturPadi industrial zone houses many textile manufacturers, and a special economic zone (SEZ) for apparel and footwear manufacturing has been set up in the southern suburbs of the city. Chennai contributes more than 50 percent of India's leather exports.
Many software and software services companies have development centres in Chennai, which contributed 14 percent of India's total software exports of  14,42,140 lakh during 200607, making it the second largest Indian city software exporter following Bangalore. The Tidel Park in Chennai was billed as Asia's largest IT park when it was built. Major software companies have their offices set up here, with some of them making Chennai their largest base.

Prominent financial institutions, including the World Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, ABN AMRO, Bank of America, The Royal Bank of Scotland, Goldman Sachs, Barclays, HSBC, ING Group, Allianz, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation, The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Abu Dhabi Commercial Bank, Asian Development Bank, Credit Suisse, BNP Paribas Fortis, Irevna, Deutsche Bank and Citibank have back office and development centre operations in the city. Chennai is home to the national level commercial banks Indian Bank and Indian Overseas Bank and many state level cooperative banks, finance and insurance companies. Telecom and Electronics manufacturers based in and around Chennai include Samsung, Nokia Siemens, Motorola, Lenovo, Dell, Force10, Wipro, Zebronics, Flextronics and Siemens among others. Chennai is currently the largest electronics hardware exporter in India, accounting for 45% of the total exports in 201011. Telecom giants Ericsson and Alcatel-Lucent, pharmaceuticals giant Pfizer and chemicals giant Dow Chemicals have research and development facilities in Chennai. The TICEL biotech park at Taramani and Golden Jubilee biotech park at Siruseri houses biotechnology companies and laboratories. Chennai has a stock exchange called the Madras Stock Exchange.
A study conducted by the National Housing Bank on the residential price index of Indian cities showed that Chennai experienced the highest growth after the 20082012 global financial crisis. Medical tourism is an important part of Chennai's economy with 45 percent of total medical tourists to India making to Chennai. The Tamil film industry and the Tamil television industry are also significant parts of Chennai's economy. The city also has a permanent exhibition complex in Nandambakkam called the Chennai Trade Centre. With 385 ultra-rich living in the city, Chennai is positioned in the sixth place among Indian cities that are home to the country's super-rich. The city is the third largest market in India for luxury cars.


=== Communication ===
Chennai is one of four Indian cities connected to the rest of the world by undersea fibre-optic cables, the other three being Mumbai, Kochi, and Tuticorin. The city is the landing point of major submarine telecommunication cable networks such as SMW4 (connecting India with Western Europe, Middle East and Southeast Asia), i2i (connecting India with Singapore), TIC (connecting India with Singapore), and BRICS (connecting India with Brasil, Russia, China and South Africa). The 3,175-km-long, 8-fiber-paired i2i has the world's largest design capacity of 8.4 terabits per second.
As of 2013, eight mobile phone service companies operate seven GSM networks including Airtel, Aircel, BSNL, Vodafone, Tata Docomo GSM, Idea, Reliance GSM and three CDMA networks including MTS, Relaince CDMA, Tata Docomo CDMA in the city. 2G Mobile internet connections are provided by all the operators and 4G, 3G mobile broadband are provided by few operators in the city. There are four land line companies  providing Commercial and domestic broadband Internet services. Chennai was the first Indian city to deploy Wi-Fi internet access in a widespread manner. As of 2010, there were 9.8 million mobile phone users in Chennai. In 2010, Chennai had the fourth highest number of active Internet users in India, with 2.2 million users.


=== Power ===
Major power plants in the city include North Chennai Thermal Power Station, GMR Vasavi Diesel Power Plant, Ennore Thermal Power Station, Basin Bridge Gas Turbine Power Station, Madras Atomic Power Station and Vallur Thermal Power Project. According to the Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited (TANGEDCO), as of 2013, the city consumes about 20 percent of the electricity in the state of Tamil Nadu. The peak evening demand of the city is 1,500 MW which is about 50 percent of the state's peak evening demand of 3,000 megawatt. This includes 37 percent consumption by the industrial sector, 30 percent by the domestic sector, 18 percent by the agricultural sector, and 11.5 percent by the commercial sector. The peak power consumption is for four months between May and August, with the city consuming the highest during June because it is when the summer peaks. On 20 June 2013, the city consumed the highest of 52,785 MU.
As of 2014, the city consumes around 3.83 crore units of power a day or 1,400 crore units annually. Hourly consumption of power in the city is about 2,000 to 3,000 MW. Availability of power in the city has become a concern in recent years due to increasing demand and slow paced addition of power plants, due to which scheduled power cuts have become increasingly common. However, this situation was eradicated by the end of 2014. As of 2016, the total electricity consumption by the street lamps in the city is 27 MW, costing about  60,000,000 per month. The 426 sq km of the city has over 248,000 streetlights, including 88,000 in the newly expanded areas.


=== Banking ===
The Reserve Bank of India ranked Chennai as third largest deposit centre and third largest credit centre nationwide as of June 2012. Prior to the advent of modern commercial banks, the banking services in the city were offered to the public by Nattukottai Chettiars or Nagarathars, chiefly in and around the neighbourhood of George Town, who offered loans as well as accepted money deposits from the public, in addition to offering loans to the agricultural labourers. Even today, many of the banking offices are housed in heritage structures belonging to the colonial era that are chiefly clustered around Rajaji road in George Town. Chennai is home to the first European-style banking system in India with the establishment of the 'Madras Bank' on 21 June 1683, almost a century before the establishment of the first commercial banks, such as the Bank of Hindustan and the General Bank of India, which were established in 1770 and 1786, respectively. Upon the recommendation of the British Finance Committee on the formation of a government bank, the Madras Bank, then known as the 'Government Bank', started functioning again from 1806. In 1843, the bank merged with the Carnatic Bank (1788), the British Bank of Madras (1795) and the Asiatic Bank (1804) and became the Bank of Madras, which was one of the three Presidency banks of India, the other two being the Bank of Bengal and the Bank of Bombay. In 1921, the three Presidency banks merged to form the Imperial Bank of India, which later became the State Bank of India in 1955.
Chennai is the headquarters of the Indian Bank, the Indian Overseas Bank and the erstwhile Bharat Overseas Bank, which merged with the Indian Overseas Bank in 2007. The city is home to the south zonal office of the Reserve Bank of India, the country's central bank, along with its zonal training centre and Reserve Bank Staff College, one of the two colleges of the bank. The city also houses the permanent back office of the World Bank, which is one of the largest buildings owned by the bank outside its headquarters in Washington, DC. The Chennai office handles corporate financial, accounting, administrative and IT services of the bank, in addition to several value-added operations of the bank that were earlier handled only in its Washington, DC office, including the bank's analytical work in bond valuation which is estimated to be US$100 billion. Several foreign banks have established their branches in the city. The first Sri Lankan Bank in India was established when the Bank of Ceylon opened its branch in Madras on 31 October 1995.


=== Health care ===

Chennai has world-class medical facilities, including both government-run and private hospitals. The government-aided hospitals include General Hospital, Adyar Cancer Institute, TB Sanatorium, and National Institute of Siddha. The National Institute of Siddha is one of the seven apex national-level educational institutions that promote excellence in Indian system of medicine and Ayurveda. Major hospitals in Chennai include Apollo Hospitals, Apollo Speciality Hospital, SRM Medical College Hospital and Research Centre, Chettinad Health City, MIOT Hospitals, Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research Institute, Fortis Malar Hospital, Lifeline Hospitals, Vasan Healthcare, Dr Mehta Hospitals, Global Hospitals & Health City, Sankara Nethralaya and Vijaya Medical & Educational Trust. Chennai attracts about 45 percent of health tourists from abroad and 30 percent to 40 percent of domestic health tourists. The city has been termed India's health capital.
The city has more than 12,500 beds in its hospitals, including about 5,000 in multi-specialty hospitals in the private sector and over 6,000 beds in the public sector. This works to 2.1 beds per 1,000 population against the national average of less than 1 bed per 1,000 population and the World Health Organisation's norms of 3 beds per 1,000 persons, higher than any other city in the country.


=== Waste management ===
The city generates 4,500 tonnes of garbage every day of which 429 tonnes are plastic waste. The city has three dumpyards, one each at Perungudi, Kodungaiyur, and Pallikaranai. The corporation has planned to close these yards and create four new dumpyards at Malaipattu, Minjur, Vallur and Kuthambakkam villages, ranging in size from 20 acres (8 ha) to 100 acres (40 ha). The civic body also spends  400 crore a year on solid waste management.


== Transport ==


=== Air ===
Chennai International Airport, comprising the Anna international terminal and the Kamaraj domestic terminal with a total passenger movements of 1.52 crore and aircraft movements of 124,712 in 20132014, Chennai is the fourth busiest airport in India after Delhi, Mumbai and Bengaluru and in terms of international passengers Chennai is the third busiest airport behind Delhi and Mumbai. Chennai handles 400 flights a day, again placing it fourth among Indian airports. The city is connected to major hubs across Asia, Europe, and North America through more than 30 national and international carriers.
The existing airport is undergoing further modernisation and expansion with an addition of 1,069.99 acres (433.01 ha), while a new greenfield airport is to be constructed at an estimated cost of  2,000 crore in Sriperumbudur on 4,200 acres (17 km2) of land. The new airport is said to be likely to handle cargo spillover traffic from the existing one.


=== Rail ===
Chennai hosts the headquarters of the Southern Railway. The city has two main railway terminals. Chennai Central station, the city's largest, provides access to other major cities as well as many other smaller towns across India, whereas Chennai Egmore provides access to destinations primarily within Tamil Nadu; however, it also handles a few interstate trains. The Chennai suburban railway network, one of the oldest in the country, facilitates transportation within the city. It consists of four broad gauge sectors terminating at two locations in the city, namely Chennai Central and Chennai Beach. While three sectors are operated on-grade, the fourth sector is majorly an elevated corridor, which links Chennai Beach to Velachery and is interlinked with the remaining rail network. Construction is underway for an underground and elevated Rapid Transit System locally known as Chennai Metro Rail. The metro line first phase from Alandur to Koyambedu was inaugurated on 29 June 2015.


=== Road ===
Chennai is one of the cities in India that is connected by the Golden Quadrilateral system of National Highways. It is connected to other Indian cities by four major National Highways (NH) that originate in the city. They are NH 4 to Mumbai (via Bengaluru, Pune), NH 5 to Kolkata (linked via NH 6) (via Visakhapatnam, Bhubaneswar), NH 45 to Theni (via Villupuram, Tiruchirapalli, Dindigul) and NH 205 to Madanapalle (via Tirupati). Chennai is connected to other parts of the state and the Union Territory of Puducherry by state highways.
The government has constructed grade separators and flyovers at major intersections, and built Inner Ring Road and Outer Ring Road. The Gemini flyover, built in 1973 crosses over the arterial road, and eases the traffic movements towards Anna Salai and towards the Kathipara Flyover. As of 2011, according to the Transport Department, there were 25.8 lakh twowheelers and 5.6 lakh fourwheelers in the city, and the Metropolitan Transport Corporation (MTC) bus fleet were 3,421, which was 0.1% of the total vehicular population of the city.
When opened, the Chennai Mofussil Bus Terminus (CMBT) was the largest bus station in Asia. It is the main intercity bus station of Chennai, administered by 7 government-owned transport corporations, which operate intercity and interstate bus services. There are many private bus companies that provide similar transport services. The MTC provides an exclusive intracity bus service, consisting of 3,421 buses on 724 routes, which provides transportation to 55.2 lakh passengers daily. The Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation operates Volvo air-conditioned services from Chennai to nearby cities like Pondicherry, Vellore, Hosur and Trichy.
The other means of road transport in the city include vans, regionally known as Maxi Cabs, auto rickshaws, on-call metered taxis and tourist taxis.
Chennai outer ring road is 62.3 km long connecting NH 45 (GST Road) at Perungalathur, NH 4 (GWT Road) at Nazarathpet, NH 205 (CTH Road) at Nemilicherry(Thiruninravur), NH 5 (GNT Road) at Nallur and TPP road at Minjur under the process by Chennai Metropolitan Area.


=== Sea ===
The city is served by two major ports, Chennai Port, one of the largest artificial ports in India, and Ennore Port. The Chennai port is the largest in Bay of Bengal, with an annual cargo tonnage of 6.146 crore (20102011), and second largest containerise hub in India, with an annual container volume of 15.23 lakh TEUs (20102011). The port handles transportation of automobiles, motorcycles and general industrial cargo. The Ennore Port with an annual cargo tonnage of 1.101 crore (20102011) handles cargo such as coal, ore and other bulk and rock mineral products. Royapuram fishing harbour is used by fishing boats and Kattupalli Shipyard near Ennore Port was inaugurated in January 2013.


== Media ==

Newspaper publishing started in Chennai with the launch of a weekly, The Madras Courier, in 1785. It was followed by the weeklies The Madras Gazzette and The Government Gazzette in 1795. The Spectator, founded in 1836, was the first English newspaper in Chennai to be owned by an Indian and became the city's first daily newspaper in 1853. The first Tamil newspaper, Swadesamitran, was launched in 1899.
The major English dailies published in Chennai are The Hindu, The New Indian Express, The Deccan Chronicle and The Times of India and many more. The evening dailies are, The Trinity Mirror and The News Today. As of 2004, The Hindu was the city's most read English newspaper, with a daily circulation of 267,349. The major business dailies published from the city are The Economic Times, The Hindu Business Line, Business Standard, Mint and The Financial Express. The major Tamil dailies include the Dina Thanthi, Dinakaran, Dina Mani, Dina Malar, The Hindu Tamil, Tamil Murasu, Makkal Kural and Malai Malar. Malayala Manorama and Mathrubhumi are the major Malayalam dailies while major Telugu dailies include Eenadu, Vaartha, Andhra Jyothi and Sakshi. The one and only Hindi Newspaper published from Chennai is the Rajasthan Patrika. The Local weekly Newspapers circulated to residents are T.Nagar Times, Pillar Times, Arcot Road Talk, Chrompet Times. Chennai's First Corporate Leisure Newspaper, The Shopping Express. Magazines published from Chennai include Ananda Vikatan, Kumudam, Kalki, Kungumam, Puthiya Thalaimurai,Thuglak, Frontline and Sportstar

Doordarshan runs two terrestrial television channels and two satellite television channels from its Chennai centre, which was set up in 1974. Private Tamil satellite television networks such as Sun TV, Raj TV, Zee Tamizh, Star Vijay, Jaya TV, Makkal TV, Vasanth TV, Kalaignar TV, Captain TV and PuthiyaThalaimurai TV broadcast out of Chennai. The Sun Network one of India's largest broadcasting companies is based in the city. While the cable TV service is entirely controlled by the state government, directtohome (DTH) is available via DD Direct Plus, Dish TV, Tata Sky, Videocon DTH, Sun direct DTH, Reliance Big TV and Digital TV Chennai is the first city in India to have implemented the Conditional Access System for cable television. Radio broadcasting started from the radio station at the Rippon Buildings complex, founded in 1930 and was then shifted to All India Radio in 1938. The city has 4 AM and 11 FM radio stations operated by All India Radio, Anna University and Suryan FM, Radio Mirchi, BIG FM, Hello FM, Radio City, Radio One among others.


== Education ==

Chennai ranks second among Indian metropolitan city centres with a 90.33 percent literacy rate. Chennai has a mix of public and private schools, some of which also receive financial support from the government.
The public school system is managed by the Chennai Corporation with an enrolment of 142,387 students in over 330 schools. Tamil and English are the primary medium of instruction, though some schools also use Telugu and Urdu as medium of instruction in their schools. Public schools run by the Chennai Corporation are all affiliated with the Tamil Nadu State Board, while private schools may be affiliated with either of the Tamil Nadu Board of Secondary Education or the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE). A few schools are affiliated with the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations, the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) board or the Montessori system. Education in Chennai starts with two years of Kindergarten from age three onward and then follows the Indian 10+2+3 plan, ten years of school, two years of higher secondary education, and three years of undergraduate education.
English is the medium of instruction in the majority of institutions for higher education. Colleges for science, arts and commerce degrees are typically affiliated with the University of Madras, which has three campuses in the city. The Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IIT Madras) and the College of Engineering, Guindy, Anna University are two well known centres for engineering education in the city. The Indian Army's Officers Training Academy is also headquartered in the city.

Chennai has a plethora of libraries, including British Council Library, American Library, Connemara Public Library, and Anna Centenary Library. The Connemara Public Library is one of four National Depository Centres in India that receive a copy of all newspapers and books published in the country. The Anna Centenary Library is the largest library in Asia.
Chennai has two CSIR research institutions namely Central Leather Research Institute and Structural Engineering Research Centre. Chennai Book Fair, an annual book fair organised in Chennai by the Booksellers and Publishers Association of South India (BAPASI), is the largest exhibition for Tamil book publishers to display their books. The fair is typically held for about 10 days between the last week of December and the third week of January. The thirty-fifth edition of the fair was held in 2012. Chennai also has Indian Maritime University to impart quality education in maritime management, engineering and different pre sea courses. This is the only central university, headquartered in Chennai to impart maritime education in India.


== Sports and recreation ==

Cricket is the most popular sport in Chennai. It was introduced in 1864 with the foundation of the Madras Cricket Club. The M.A. Chidambaram Stadium established in 1916 is among the oldest cricket stadium in India. The stadium was also one of the venues of the 1987,1996 and 2011 ICC Cricket World Cups. Chemplast Cricket Ground located at the IIT Madras campus is another important venue for cricket matches. Prominent cricketers from the city include former cricket captains S. Venkataraghavan and Kris Srikkanth. A cricket fast bowling academy called the MRF Pace Foundation, whose coaches include T. A. Sekhar and Glenn Mcgrath, is based in Chennai. Being home to the Indian Premier League (IPL) cricket team Chennai Super Kings, the city hosted the finals of the IPL's 2011 and 2012 series.
Chennai was the venue of the 1995 South Asian Games. Chennai is home to a World Series Hockey (WSH) team, the Chennai Cheetahs. The Mayor Radhakrishnan Stadium is associated with hockey and was venue for the international hockey tournament the 2005 Men's Champions Trophy and the 2007 Men's Asia Cup. The Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium is associated for hosting Football and athletic competitions, it also houses a multipurpose indoor complex for competition in volleyball, basketball and table tennis. Water sports are played in the Velachery Aquatic Complex. Tennis sport is popularising among the city youths, Since 1997 Chennai has been host to the only ATP World Tour event held in India, the Chennai Open. Vijay Amritraj, Mahesh Bhupathi Ramesh Krishnan and Somdev Devvarman are tennis players from Chennai.

Madras Boat Club (founded in 1846) and the Royal Madras Yacht Club (founded by Sir Francis Spring in 1911) promote the sailing sports in Chennai, and organise national and international sailing events. Automobile racing in India has been closely connected with Chennai since its beginnings shortly after independence. Motor racing events are held on a special purpose track in Irungattukottai, Sriperumbudur, which has also been the venue for several international competitions. Formula One driver Karun Chandhok was born in Chennai.
Horse racing is held at the Guindy Race Course, while rowing competitions are hosted at the Madras Boat Club. The city has two 18hole golf courses, the Cosmopolitan Club and the Gymkhana Club, both established in the late nineteenth century. The city has a rugby union team called the Chennai Cheetahs.
Previous world chess champion Viswanathan Anand grew up in Chennai. Other sports persons of repute from Chennai include table tennis players Sharath Kamal and twotime world carrom champion, Maria Irudayam. Chennai was the host of the World Chess Championship 2013 match between Viswanathan Anand and Magnus Carlsen. Chennaiyin FC representing the city plays in Indian Super League, an association football tournament and its home ground is Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium.


=== City based teams ===


== International relations ==


=== Foreign missions ===

The consular presence in the city dates back to 1794, when William Abbott was appointed US consular agent for South India. As of 2012, there were 43 foreign representations in Chennai, including consulates general, deputy high commissions and honorary consulates. The American Consulate in Chennai is one of the top adjudication posts in the world and the number one in processing employment-based visas. It was ranked among the top globally in issuing 'L' and 'H' category visas for workers and professionals and was ranked eighth globally in terms of all category of visas being issued.
The Foreigners Regional Registration Office (FRRO), which is the office of the field officers in charge of immigration and registration activities in the city, is located at Shastri Bhavan at Haddows Road.


=== Twin towns  Sister cities ===
Chennai has sister city relationships with the following cities of the world:


== See also ==

Areas of Chennai
Chennai International Airport
List of people from Chennai


== Footnotes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website of Chennai District
Official website of the Corporation of Chennai
Papers of George Macartney, University of PennsylvaniaThe Creative Circle (also known as The Advertising Creative Circle and The Advertising Creative Circle of Great Britain) is an educational awards body dedicated to creativity in British advertising, and the oldest advertising and marketing awards body in Europe. Their mission is to help promote creative excellence in advertising, while sharing knowledge and experience through educational programs and supporting young creative people. The annual Creative Circle awards are highly regarded, and judged by the British advertising creative community themselves. Their main offices are in Covent Garden, London.


== Origins ==
After many months of preliminary discussions, the Advertising Creative Circle of Great Britain was founded on 8 October 1945, at a luncheon at The Trocadero Hotel, London. The concept can be traced back to two forward-thinking ad men, H.F. Crowther (Director of Advertising Agency Rumble, Crowther & Nicholas) and G.R. Pope (Advertising Manager of The Times).
At the time, Crowther and Pope felt there was no other advertising organisation concerned exclusively with the craft of visualising, writing and designing advertising, and so decided to create an Advertising Creative Circle that could "not only provide a forum for such creative men, but [also] contribute to raising the status of advertising as a profession".


=== The First Council ===
This first council was responsible for determining subscriptions, membership control, copy vigilance, press relations and a programme of art exhibitions, publications and functions. In addition, they were tasked with selecting 10 more honorary members and a further 50 ordinary members, to be made up of noteworthy people wholly engaged in creative work - copywriters, copy chiefs, artists, art directors, layout men, visualisers and more.
Within its press relations functions, the Creative Circle hoped not only to keep the press informed about advertising matters generally, but also "take up the cudgels" whenever it was publicly attacked.


== Honours (awards) ==
The Creative Circle has awarded the very best of British advertising creativity since 1986. There are several levels of awards presented on the Honours Evening. From commendations, through to Bronze, Silver, and Gold, and ultimately, the Gold of Gold award for the single best piece of work that year. The President also presents a personal award to the person or organisation that has had the greatest impact on advertising that year.


=== List of President's Award winners ===


=== List of Gold of Gold Award winners ===
Established in 1989 as 'The Big One', and known from 1996-2011 as 'the Platinum Award', the currently named Gold of Golds is given to the single best advertising creative idea of the year (the only exception being 2008, when it was felt advertising agency Fallon deserved the award, having produced both the Cadbury Gorilla commercial and the Skoda Fabia Cake commercial in the same year [6]).


== Role Reversal Seminar ==
The Creative Circle Role Reversal Seminar was created in 1968 by Sam Rothenstein - a copywriter who believed that creative standards dont just depend on advertising agencies but on clients too.
The concept of the course is simple: one of the best ways to understand someone is to put yourself in their shoes. So, a group of middleweight marketers take on the role of an advertising agency creative department. While agency Creative Directors take on the role of the clients.
The marketers are grouped into "Agency" teams and made to pitch against each other for a piece of business (as happens in the real world). The "Agencies" are given a creative brief from a fictional client simultaneously. They then have just 72 hours to conceive and produce a pitch-winning idea. This includes deciding upon a strategy and slogan, then creating and designing ad executions, across all media - they're even expected to film, edit, and present a television commercial in that time.
Each "Agency" is assisted by a professional Creative Director, to keep them on track, and an Art Director (known as a "Tutor" or a "Wrist") to help them turn their ideas into visuals and storyboards. A film crew and production team are also on hand to help with the filming and editing of the commercial.
After the 72 hours are up, the "Agency" teams pitch their ideas to the fictional clients - a consortium of real Creative Directors - who then select a winner.
The course is designed to give marketers the opportunity to see things from the point of view of their agency - learning through doing - which often gives them a completely new perspective on that relationship. It's also renowned throughout the industry for incredibly late nights and much drunken bonding, giving clients and agencies an insight into each other's worlds. It's even been known to influence real-world client/agency relationships, with one story speculating that many years ago, Guinness switched its multi-million pound advertising account to J. Walter Thompson as a result of one such seminar.
The Role Reversal Seminar ran unbroken for precisely 40 years, always taking place in one of the UK's top universities - including Cambridge and St Andrew's - before settling for the last 20 years at Trinity College, Oxford. Over those 40 years, the course attracted thousands of marketers, but was closed in 2008 due to financial constraints.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Site
Winners Archive 2003-2011This is a list of television programs currently, formerly, and soon to be broadcast by the Global Television Network, a national broadcast network owned by Corus Entertainment. The Global Toronto schedule is normally considered the network "base" schedule.


== Current programming ==


=== Original series ===


==== Drama series ====
Ransom (Coming This Fall 2016)
Private Eyes (2016present)
Houdini & Doyle (2016present)


==== Reality/documentary series ====
Big Brother Canada (2015present) (Slice, 20132014)
Border Security: America's Front Line (2016present)
Canada's Walk of Fame (2009present)
Driving Television (2003present)


==== News programming ====
Entertainment Tonight Canada (September 12, 2005present)
Global National (September 3, 2001present)
The Morning Show (June 5, 2013  present on National Edition)
The West Block (November 6, 2011present)


=== Foreign ===


== Formerly broadcast by Global ==


=== News programming ===
16x9 (November 30, 2008  June 28, 2016)
60 Minutes
Canada Tonight (2001)
Entertainment Desk
Global Sunday (20012005)


=== Daytime programming ===
As the World Turns
Guiding Light
Passions
The Rosie O'Donnell Show
The Queen Latifah Show (Sept 16, 2013-Sept 5, 2014)


=== Late night talk, specials or variety programs ===
Cosmos: A Spacetime Odyssey (2014)
The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson
The Late Late Show With Craig Kilborn
Late Night with Conan O'Brien
Late Night with David Letterman
The Mike Bullard Show
Night Walk (AKA Night Ride, Night Music, and Night Moves)
The Test (Sept, 2013-May, 2014)
The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson
The Tonight Show with Jay Leno


=== Comedy programming ===
3rd Rock from the Sun
A to Z (Dec 9, 2015Jan 22, 2015)
About a Boy (Feb 22, 2014Feb 20, 2015)
Allen Gregory (2011)
American Dad! (Feb 6, 2005July 2014)
Are You There, Chelsea? (2012)
Arrested Development (20032006)
Becker
Bob and Margaret
Bob's Burgers
Cheers
Chico and the Man
Clueless
Dharma & Greg
Diff'rent Strokes
Everybody Loves Raymond
The Exes (FebruaryJune, 2012)
Family Guy
Frasier
Friends (19942004)
Futurama (19992003)
Game of Silence (April 12-June 5, 2016)
Good Times
Growing Up Fisher (Feb 23June 11, 2014)
I Hate My Teenage Daughter (20112012)
The Jane Show
The Jeffersons
The Joke's on Us
Just Shoot Me!
Kath & Kim (20082009)
King of the Hill (19972009)
Love Bites (2011)
The Love Boat
Loving Friends and Perfect Couples (1983)
Mad About You
MADtv
Major Dad
Make Me Laugh
Malcolm in the Middle (20002001)
Married... with Children
The Millers (only one season, then formerly aired by CTV)
My Name Is Earl (20052009)
My Three Sons
Napoleon Dynamite (2012)
The New Addams Family
The New Red Green Show
NewsRadio
One Day at a Time
Parker Lewis Can't Lose (19901993)
Partners (2014)
Raising Hope (20102011) (now airs on City)
Rob (2012)
Sanford and Son
Second City TV
Seinfeld
Sit Down, Shut Up (2009)
Sledge Hammer!
South Park (now airs on MuchMusic)
Still Standing
Super Dave
That '70s Show
'Til Death (20062010)
The War at Home
Will & Grace
The Winner


=== Drama programming ===
90210 (20082012) (now airs on Netflix)
Adderly
Adventure Inc. (20022003)
The Adventures of Sinbad
Andromeda
Awake (2012)
Battle Creek (March 1May 24, 2015)
Beverly Hills, 90210
The Black Donnellys (2007)
Blackfly
The Blue Knight
Boston Public
Brothers & Sisters (20062011)
Columbo
Combat Hospital (2011)
Constantine (20142015)
Containment (April 19July 19, 2016)
Crossing Jordan
Dawson's Creek
Day Break
Destiny Ridge (1993-1995)
Doc
Dollhouse (20092011)
Dynasty
Extant
Falcon Beach
The Finder (2012)
Finder of Lost Loves
The Firm (2012)
Friday Night Lights
A Gifted Man (2012)
Gilmore Girls
The Good Wife (Sept 22, 2009May 8, 2016)
Gracepoint (Oct 2Dec 11, 2014)
The Guard (20082009)
Hack
Harper's Island
Heroes (20062010)
Heroes Reborn
Hotel
House (20042012)
In the Heat of the Night
Jack & Jill
Kidnapped
Knots Landing
L.A. Law
Life (20072009)
Life on Mars (20082009)
Loving Friends and Perfect Couples (1983)
Miami Vice
Mickey Spillane's Mike Hammer
Millennium
Minority Report (September 21November 30, 2015)
Mutant X
The New Alfred Hitchcock Presents
The Night Shift
NUMB3RS (20052010)
NYC 22 (2012)
NYPD Blue (seasons 2-12; 19942005)
The Outer Limits
Parenthood (March 2, 2010Jan 29, 2015)
Partners in Crime
Party of Five
Psych (2007March 26, 2014)
Queen of Swords (20002001)
Remedy (Feb 24, 2014May 19, 2015; original series)
Ringer (20112012)
Rookie Blue (June 24, 2010  2015)
Runaway
Smallville (Season 1 only) (20012002)
St. Elsewhere
Standoff
State of Affairs (Nov 17, 2014Feb 16, 2015)
Traders
Train 48
Troupers
Under the Dome (20132015)
Vanished
Without a Trace
Wonderfalls
The X-Files
Xena: Warrior Princess
Zoe Busiek: Wild Card


=== Reality programming ===
American Dream Builders (March 28May 30, 2014)
The Apprentice
The Celebrity Apprentice
COPS
Food for Thought
Hotel Hell (August 13, 2012September 9, 2014)
Kitchen Nightmares (September 19, 2007September 12, 2014)
My Fabulous Gay Wedding
Popstars
Recipe to Riches


=== Game shows ===
Are You Smarter Than a Canadian 5th Grader?
Bumper Stumpers
Chain Reaction
Deal or No Deal Canada
Jackpot
The Joker's Wild
The Last Word
Lingo
Pitfall
Split Second
Wheel of Fortune (formerly aired by CFMT, CFTO, CBC then CHCH; now airs on Yes TV)
Wipeout (Seasons 1 to 5 only; then formerly aired 6 to 7 by City)


=== Children's programming ===
Blue Rainbow (formerly broadcast on CBC, 19841989)
Fibi's Funny Bones
The KangaZoo Club
Kidsbeat
Kidstreet
Popular Mechanics for Kids
Prairie Berry Pie
Ready or Not
Science International (later What Will They Think Of Next?)
Size Small
Strange Days at Blake Holsey High
Tell-a-Tale Town


=== Sports programming ===
ECW on Syfy (20062010)
National Football League
WWE NXT


== See also ==
Global Television Network
List of programs broadcast by Global Reality Channel
List of Canadian television series


== References ==


== External links ==
Global Television Programming through the years - Canadian Communications FoundationFilm Division is an award winning Birmingham, UK based music video and independent film production collaborative founded by director/producer/cinematographer Stewart Addison. Its members include director Jazz Virk. Film Division were featured in the magazine Little White Lies in September 2011.


== Members ==
Stewart Addison
Louis Murrall
Jazz Virk
Andrew McGovern


== Collaborators ==
Louis Murrall
Jon Pegg


== Short Film/Documentries ==


== References ==


== Associated members ==
Manish Jain
Pawan Sharma
Tanveer Alam
Dharam Soni
Hemant Pandey


=== Videos ===
FD Vimeo
FilmDivisionTV


== External links ==
Official website
Film Division on Vimeo
Film Division in Little White Lies magazine
Film Division on the BBC news
Film Division's Stewart Addison & Philip Bloom DP
FilmDivisionTV YouTubeA teaching assistant or teacher's aide (TA) or education assistant (EA) is an individual who assists a teacher with instructional responsibilities. TAs include: graduate teaching assistants (GTAs), who are graduate students; undergraduate teaching assistants (UTAs), who are undergraduate students; secondary school TAs, who are either high school students or adults; and elementary school TAs, who are adults (also known as paraprofessional educators or teacher's aides). By definition, TAs assist with classes, but many graduate students serve as the sole instructor for one or more classes each semester as a teaching fellow or graduate student instructor. Graduate and adult TAs generally have a fixed salary determined by each contract period (usually a semester or an academic year); however, undergraduates and high school students are sometimes unpaid and, in the US and other countries with the credit system, receive course credits in return for their assistance. Teaching assistants often help the main teacher by managing students with learning disabilities, such as ADHD, or even physical disabilities, such as blindness or deafness.


== Graduate ==
Graduate teaching assistants (often referred to as GTAs or simply TAs) are graduate students employed on a temporary contract by a department at a college or university in teaching-related responsibilities. In New Zealand, Australian, and some Canadian universities, graduate TAs are known as tutors. North American graduate TA positions provide funding for postgraduate researchalthough the main purpose is to provide teaching supportand it often serves as a first career step for aspiring academics. TA responsibilities vary greatly and may include: tutoring; holding office hours; invigilating tests or exams; and assisting a professor with a large lecture class by teaching students in recitation, laboratory, or discussion sessions. Professors may also use their teaching assistants to help teach discussions during regular class. This gives the graduate student opportunity to use their teaching skills, as many are in pursuit of teaching careers. Some graduate students assist in distance education courses by meeting with the students as professors are not able to. Graduate TAs should not be confused with teaching fellows (TFs) or graduate student instructors (GSIs), who are graduate students who serve as the primary instructors for courses. However, at some universities the TF and TA titles are used interchangeably.


=== Tutorials ===
In British, Australian, New Zealand, South African, Italian, and some Canadian universities, a tutor is often, but not always, a postgraduate student or a lecturer assigned to conduct a seminar for undergraduate students, often known as a tutorial. The equivalent of this kind of tutor in the United States and the rest of Canada is known as a graduate teaching assistant or a graduate student instructor (GSI).


== Undergraduate ==
UTAs or JTAs (Junior Teacher Assistants) usually serve as true assistants to a class; they typically have taken the course with which they are assisting, often with the same professor, and have performed well in it. This case is less common for GTAs, since many would have been undergraduates at other institutions. Unlike professors and GTAs, UTAs generally do not have a fixed salary but instead are paid by the hour, earn credit hours, or volunteer their time.


== High school ==
The term teaching assistant is used in the high school and middle school setting for students or adults that assist a teacher with one or more classes. The responsibilities, situations, and conditions of these individuals' involvement differ from those in higher education. A less formal position, a TA job in secondary education is generally determined by the supervising teacher. Common tasks include assisting students with their work, and taking attendance. Most of the responsibilities of Teaching Assistants do not require the academic expertise of the professor in charge. Some teaching assistants at this level may teach portions of the class lessons, or teach lessons to small groups of students who need extra instruction. Many TAs work "one-on-one" with special needs students; these TAs shadow their student and assist with classwork, organization, and behavior management. In some parts of the United States it is customary or even required that each classroom have one certified teacher and one or more co-teachers or teaching assistants.
Students attending high school and middle schools can take a course, usually an elective, and perform tasks such as grade and record scores on homework or tests. The work done by the assistant in the role is not tedious and the teacher in this setting reviews the grading to assign partial credit on tests and uses discretion.


== Elementary school ==
An elementary school teaching assistant is an adult who is hired to help a teacher with class-related duties, which are similar to those encountered in middle and high school settings. They are sometimes referred to as paraprofessionals ('paras' for short) or teacher's aides. Elementary school teaching assistants are generally hired on a contract that lasts the entire academic year. Teaching assistants aide with multiple duties within schools, and can be hired in special education as well.


== See also ==
Tutor
Research assistant
Tutor expertise in adult education


== References ==


== External links ==
The Art of TAing
What are TA, RA and GA? Funding ?
National Career Service profile of a Teaching Assistant
Teaching Assistant Resource for Jobs and Courses
Changing career to a Teaching AssistantApac is a town in Apac District, Northern Uganda. It is the 'chief town' of the district and the district headquarters are located there. The district is named after the town.


== Location ==
Apac is located approximately 115 kilometres (71 mi), by road, south of Gulu, the largest city in Northern Uganda. This location lies approximately 63 kilometres (39 mi), by road, southwest of Lira, the largest town in the sub-region. The coordinates of the town are:159'06.0"N, 3232'06.0"E (Latitude:1.9850; Longitude:32.5350).


== Population ==
The 2002 national census estimated the population of the town at about 10,140. In 2010, the population of Apac was estimated at about 13,300, by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS). In 2011, UBOS estimated the mid-year population of Apac at approximately 13,700. In August 2014, the national population census put the population of Apac at 14,503.


== Points of interest ==
The following points of interest lie in the town or near the town limits:
The headquarters of Apac District Administration
The offices of Apac Town Council
Apac Hospital - A 120-bed public hospital, administered by the Uganda Ministry of Health
A branch of Stanbic Bank
A branch of Centenary Bank (Uganda) Limited
The studios of Radio Divine Fm 90.6 which is a commercial radio station
The studios of Radio Apac - A community radio station
Travellers Inn - A private motel in the center of town
Alenga Primary School - A public elementary school on the outskirts of town
Apac Central Market


== Photos ==
Main Street in Apac Town


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Visiting Apac TownA product manager communicates product vision from the highest levels of executive leadership to development and implementation teams. The product manager is often called the product "CEO." The product manager investigates, selects, and drives the development of products for an organization, performing the activities of product management.
A product manager considers numerous factors such as intended demographic, the products offered by the competition, and how well the product fits with the company's business model. Generally, a product manager manages one or more tangible products. However, the term may be used to describe a person who manages intangible products, such as music, information, and services.
A product manager's role in tangible goods industries is similar to a program director's role in service industries.
Diverse interpretations regarding the role of the product manager are the norm. The product manager title is often used in many ways to describe drastically different duties and responsibilities. Even within the high-tech industry where product management is better defined, the product manager's job description varies widely among companies. This is due to tradition and intuitive interpretations by different individuals.
In the financial services industry (banking, insurance etc.), product managers manage products (for example, credit card portfolios), their profit and loss, and also determine the business development strategy.
In some companies, the product manager also acts as a:
Product marketing manager: may perform all outbound marketing activities in the older sense of the term
Project manager: may perform all activities related to schedule and resource management
Program manager: may perform activities related to schedule, resource, and cross-functional execution
Product owner: a popular role in Agile development methodology, may perform all activities related to a self-encapsulated feature or feature set plan, development and releases.
Technical product manager: similar to product owner, but may perform all activities from technology perspective.
Product designer: closer to UX designer but more focus on entire function flows.


== Product management in software development ==
The role of the product manager was originally created to manage the complexity of the product lines of a business, as well as to ensure that those products were profitable. Product managers can come from many different backgrounds, because their primary skills involve working well with customers and understanding the problems the product is intended to solve.
A product manager is responsible for orchestrating the various activities associated with ensuring that a product is delivered that meets users' needs. A software product manager's role varies as the software moves through its lifecycle; earlier in the development process the product manager meets the intended audience of the product to engage in requirements elicitation, whereas later in the lifecycle the product manager's primary focus may be in acceptance testing of the product. Throughout all the stages of the product development process, the product manager represents the needs of end-users, evaluates market trends and competition, and uses this information to determine what features to build. For example, a product manager may decide a feature is needed because users are asking for it, or because the feature is needed to stay competitive. In order to facilitate this decision making process the product manager may set out a vision for the product or a general framework for making product decisions. The product manager also ensures an atmosphere of cohesiveness and focused collaboration between all the members of the team, all in the interest of driving the product forward. Product managers are often thought of as sitting at the intersection of business, design, and technology.
Within an agile software development environment day-to-day responsibilities of a product manager include creating and prioritizing the product backlog, which is a list of things to be done by the development team. The product backlog is often made up of user stories, "a placeholder for a conversation between the product manager... and the development team." These are brief narrative descriptions of what a feature should do, including a checklist of items that are required to be in place in order for the feature to be considered done, called the acceptance criteria. The details of how the feature is developed are worked out by developers and designers. At the end of the development sprint, the product manager is responsible for verifying that the acceptance criteria have been met; only then is the work on the feature officially done.
Notable individuals who have held the role of product manager in a software development company include Sundar Pichai (CEO of Google) Marissa Mayer (CEO of Yahoo!), Premal Shah (president of Kiva.org), Reid Hoffman (founder of LinkedIn), and Kevin Systrom (founder of Instagram).
The need for a separate product manager role depends on the size of an organization; in smaller organizations, the CEO may take on the responsibilities of product manager.


== See also ==
Program director
Collaborative Product Development
New product development
Product management
Product planning
Product marketing
Marketing requirements document


== References ==Information technology (IT) is the application of computers and internet to store, study, retrieve, transmit, and manipulate data, or information, often in the context of a business or other enterprise. IT is considered a subset of information and communications technology (ICT). In 2012, Zuppo proposed an ICT hierarchy where each hierarchy level "contain some degree of commonality in that they are related to technologies that facilitate the transfer of information and various types of electronically mediated communications." Business/IT was one level of the ICT hierarchy.
The term is commonly used as a synonym for computers and computer networks, but it also encompasses other information distribution technologies such as television and telephones. Several industries are associated with information technology, including computer hardware, software, electronics, semiconductors, internet, telecom equipment, engineering, healthcare, e-commerce, and computer services.
Humans have been storing, retrieving, manipulating, and communicating information since the Sumerians in Mesopotamia developed writing in about 3000 BC, but the term information technology in its modern sense first appeared in a 1958 article published in the Harvard Business Review; authors Harold J. Leavitt and Thomas L. Whisler commented that "the new technology does not yet have a single established name. We shall call it information technology (IT)." Their definition consists of three categories: techniques for processing, the application of statistical and mathematical methods to decision-making, and the simulation of higher-order thinking through computer programs.
Based on the storage and processing technologies employed, it is possible to distinguish four distinct phases of IT development: pre-mechanical (3000 BC  1450 AD), mechanical (14501840), electromechanical (18401940), electronic (1940present), and moreover, IT as a service. This article focuses on the most recent period (electronic), which began in about 1940.


== History of computer technology ==

Devices have been used to aid computation for thousands of years, probably initially in the form of a tally stick. The Antikythera mechanism, dating from about the beginning of the first century BC, is generally considered to be the earliest known mechanical analog computer, and the earliest known geared mechanism. Comparable geared devices did not emerge in Europe until the 16th century, and it was not until 1645 that the first mechanical calculator capable of performing the four basic arithmetical operations was developed.
Electronic computers, using either relays or valves, began to appear in the early 1940s. The electromechanical Zuse Z3, completed in 1941, was the world's first programmable computer, and by modern standards one of the first machines that could be considered a complete computing machine. Colossus, developed during the Second World War to decrypt German messages was the first electronic digital computer. Although it was programmable, it was not general-purpose, being designed to perform only a single task. It also lacked the ability to store its program in memory; programming was carried out using plugs and switches to alter the internal wiring. The first recognisably modern electronic digital stored-program computer was the Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine (SSEM), which ran its first program on 21 June 1948.
The development of transistors in the late 1940s at Bell Laboratories allowed a new generation of computers to be designed with greatly reduced power consumption. The first commercially available stored-program computer, the Ferranti Mark I, contained 4050 valves and had a power consumption of 25 kilowatts. By comparison the first transistorised computer, developed at the University of Manchester and operational by November 1953, consumed only 150 watts in its final version.


== Data processing ==


=== Data storage ===

Early electronic computers such as Colossus made use of punched tape, a long strip of paper on which data was represented by a series of holes, a technology now obsolete. Electronic data storage, which is used in modern computers, dates from World War II, when a form of delay line memory was developed to remove the clutter from radar signals, the first practical application of which was the mercury delay line. The first random-access digital storage device was the Williams tube, based on a standard cathode ray tube, but the information stored in it and delay line memory was volatile in that it had to be continuously refreshed, and thus was lost once power was removed. The earliest form of non-volatile computer storage was the magnetic drum, invented in 1932 and used in the Ferranti Mark 1, the world's first commercially available general-purpose electronic computer.
IBM introduced the first hard disk drive in 1956, as a component of their 305 RAMAC computer system. Most digital data today is still stored magnetically on hard disks, or optically on media such as CD-ROMs. Until 2002 most information was stored on analog devices, but that year digital storage capacity exceeded analog for the first time. As of 2007 almost 94% of the data stored worldwide was held digitally: 52% on hard disks, 28% on optical devices and 11% on digital magnetic tape. It has been estimated that the worldwide capacity to store information on electronic devices grew from less than 3 exabytes in 1986 to 295 exabytes in 2007, doubling roughly every 3 years.


==== Databases ====

Database management systems emerged in the 1960s to address the problem of storing and retrieving large amounts of data accurately and quickly. One of the earliest such systems was IBM's Information Management System (IMS), which is still widely deployed more than 40 years later. IMS stores data hierarchically, but in the 1970s Ted Codd proposed an alternative relational storage model based on set theory and predicate logic and the familiar concepts of tables, rows and columns. The first commercially available relational database management system (RDBMS) was available from Oracle in 1980.
All database management systems consist of a number of components that together allow the data they store to be accessed simultaneously by many users while maintaining its integrity. A characteristic of all databases is that the structure of the data they contain is defined and stored separately from the data itself, in a database schema.
The extensible markup language (XML) has become a popular format for data representation in recent years. Although XML data can be stored in normal file systems, it is commonly held in relational databases to take advantage of their "robust implementation verified by years of both theoretical and practical effort". As an evolution of the Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML), XML's text-based structure offers the advantage of being both machine and human-readable.


=== Data retrieval ===
The relational database model introduced a programming-language independent Structured Query Language (SQL), based on relational algebra.
The terms "data" and "information" are not synonymous. Anything stored is data, but it only becomes information when it is organized and presented meaningfully. Most of the world's digital data is unstructured, and stored in a variety of different physical formats even within a single organization. Data warehouses began to be developed in the 1980s to integrate these disparate stores. They typically contain data extracted from various sources, including external sources such as the Internet, organized in such a way as to facilitate decision support systems (DSS).


=== Data transmission ===
Data transmission has three aspects: transmission, propagation, and reception. It can be broadly categorized as broadcasting, in which information is transmitted unidirectionally downstream, or telecommunications, with bidirectional upstream and downstream channels.
XML has been increasingly employed as a means of data interchange since the early 2000s, particularly for machine-oriented interactions such as those involved in web-oriented protocols such as SOAP, describing "data-in-transit rather than ... data-at-rest". One of the challenges of such usage is converting data from relational databases into XML Document Object Model (DOM) structures.


=== Data manipulation ===
Hilbert and Lopez identify the exponential pace of technological change (a kind of Moore's law): machines' application-specific capacity to compute information per capita roughly doubled every 14 months between 1986 and 2007; the per capita capacity of the world's general-purpose computers doubled every 18 months during the same two decades; the global telecommunication capacity per capita doubled every 34 months; the world's storage capacity per capita required roughly 40 months to double (every 3 years); and per capita broadcast information has doubled every 12.3 years.
Massive amounts of data are stored worldwide every day, but unless it can be analysed and presented effectively it essentially resides in what have been called data tombs: "data archives that are seldom visited". To address that issue, the field of data mining  "the process of discovering interesting patterns and knowledge from large amounts of data"  emerged in the late 1980s.


== Perspective ==


=== Academic perspective ===
In an academic context, the Association for Computing Machinery defines IT as "undergraduate degree programs that prepare students to meet the computer technology needs of business, government, healthcare, schools, and other kinds of organizations .... IT specialists assume responsibility for selecting hardware and software products appropriate for an organization, integrating those products with organizational needs and infrastructure, and installing, customizing, and maintaining those applications for the organizations computer users."


=== Commercial and employment perspective ===
In a business context, the Information Technology Association of America has defined information technology as "the study, design, development, application, implementation, support or management of computer-based information systems". The responsibilities of those working in the field include network administration, software development and installation, and the planning and management of an organization's technology life cycle, by which hardware and software are maintained, upgraded and replaced.
The business value of information technology lies in the automation of business processes, provision of information for decision making, connecting businesses with their customers, and the provision of productivity tools to increase efficiency.


=== Ethical perspective ===

The field of information ethics was established by mathematician Norbert Wiener in the 1940s. Some of the ethical issues associated with the use of information technology include:
Breaches of copyright by those downloading files stored without the permission of the copyright holders
Employers monitoring their employees' emails and other Internet usage
Unsolicited emails
Hackers accessing online databases
Web sites installing cookies or spyware to monitor a user's online activities


== See also ==
Data processing
Information management
Information and communications technology (ICT)
Journal of Cases on Information Technology


== References ==
Notes

Citations

Bibliography


== Further reading ==
Allen, T., and M. S. Morton, eds. 1994. Information Technology and the Corporation of the 1990s. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gitta, Cosmas and South, David (2011). Southern Innovator Magazine Issue 1: Mobile Phones and Information Technology: United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation. ISSN 2222-9280
Gleick, James (2011).The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood. New York: Pantheon Books.
Price, Wilson T. (1981), Introduction to Computer Data Processing, Holt-Saunders International Editions, ISBN 4-8337-0012-3 
Shelly, Gary, Cashman, Thomas, Vermaat, Misty, and Walker, Tim. (1999). Discovering Computers 2000: Concepts for a Connected World. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Course Technology.
Webster, Frank, and Robins, Kevin. (1986). Information Technology  A Luddite Analysis. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.


== External links ==A vice president (in British English: vice-president for governments and director for businesses) is an officer in government or business who is below a president (managing director) in rank. The name comes from the Latin vice meaning "in place of". In some countries, the vice president is called the deputy president. In everyday speech, the abbreviation VP can be used.


== In government ==

In government, a vice president is a person whose primary responsibility is to act in place of the president on the event of the president's death, resignation or incapacity. Vice presidents are either elected jointly with the president as their running mate, or more rarely, appointed independently after the president's election.
Most governments with vice presidents have one person in this role at any time, although in some countries there are two or more vice-presidents. If the president is not present, dies, resigns, or is otherwise unable to fulfill their duties, the vice president will generally serve as president. In many presidential systems, the vice president does not wield much day-to-day political power, but is still considered an important member of the cabinet. Several vice presidents in the Americas held the position of President of the Senate; this is the case, for example, in Argentina, the United States, and Uruguay. The vice president sometimes assumes some of the ceremonial duties of the president, such as attending functions and events that the actual president may be too busy to attend; the Vice President of the United States, for example, often attends funerals of world leaders on behalf of the president. 


== In business ==

In business, "vice president" refers to a management position. A vice president usually reports directly to the president or CEO of the company and is a member of the executive management team. Some corporations that use this term may have individuals with the title of vice president responsible for specific business divisions (e.g., Vice President for Sales and Marketing, Vice President for Finance, or Vice President for Human Resources). When there are several vice presidents in a company, these individuals are sometimes differentiated with titles denoting higher positions such as executive vice president and/or senior vice president with the remaining management team holding the title vice president. The title of assistant vice president or associate vice president is used in large organizations below vice president.
A corporate vice president is an older term that usually denotes a vice president that is named as a corporate officer by the board of directors. Not all vice presidents in a company in the modern business environment are named as an official corporate officer.


=== Hierarchy of vice presidents ===
Depending on the specific organization, the following may be an example of the hierarchy of the vice presidents:
Senior Executive Vice President (SEVP) (uncommon)
Deputy President (DP) (uncommon)
Executive Vice President (EVP)
Senior Vice President (SVP)
First Vice President (FVP)
Assistant Vice President or Associate Vice President (AVP)
Of course, this comparison is not strictly correct, as "director" is a legal term, meaning someone registered with the relevant country's company registrar (or simply named in the legal documents, for countries not having company registration) as having managerial control of the company, and having legal responsibility for its operation, whilst a vice president does not. In either case the responsibilities may be overall to the company, a region (US, EMEA, CEE...), business unit or function such as Sales, Marketing, IT etc.


=== Expanded use ===
In large brokerage firms and investment banks, there are usually several vice presidents in each local branch office, the title being sometimes a marketing approach for customers, than denoting an actual managerial position within the company. Some companies liberally give out the job title vice president, perhaps as an inexpensive way for a company to recognize employees, or perhaps because of delayering when an employee can't be moved higher in the organization but still deserves recognition. In these cases, the title merely implies that someone is in middle or upper management.


== Usage in other organizations ==
In other organizations (e.g., trade unions, societies, clubs) one or multiple vice presidents are elected by the members of the organization. When multiple vice presidents are elected, the positions are usually numbered to prevent confusion as to who may preside or succeed to the office of president upon vacancy of that office (for example: 1st vice president, 2nd vice president, and so on). In some cases vice presidents are given titles due to their specific responsibilities, for example: Vice President of Operations, Finance, etc. In some associations the first vice president can be interchangeable with executive vice president and the remaining vice presidents are ranked in order of their seniority.
The primary responsibility of the vice president of a club or organization is to be prepared to assume the powers and duties of the office of the president in the case of a vacancy in that office. If the office of President becomes vacant, the vice president (or in clubs with multiple vice presidents, the VP that occupies the highest-ranking office), will assume the office of president, with the lower vice presidents to fill in the remaining vice presidencies, leaving the lowest vice presidency to be filled by either election or appointment. If the bylaws of a club specifically provide of the Officer title of President-Elect, that officer would assume the powers and duties of the president upon vacancy of that office only if specified in the bylaws.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
National Association of Parliamentarians (1993). Spotlight on You the Vice-President or President-Elect. Independence, MO: National Association of Parliamentarians. ISBN 1-884048-20X. 


== External links ==
American Institute of Parliamentarians -- www.aipparl.orgGenetic counseling is the process by which the patients or relatives at risk of an inherited disorder are advised of the consequences and nature of the disorder, the probability of developing or transmitting it, and the options open to them in management and family planning. This complex process can be separated into diagnostic (the actual estimation of risk) and supportive aspects.


== Genetic counselors ==
The National Society of Genetic Counselors (NSGC) officially defines genetic counseling as the understanding and adaptation to the medical, psychological and familial implications of genetic contributions to disease. This process integrates:
Interpretation of family and medical histories to assess the chance of disease occurrence or recurrence.
Education about inheritance, testing, management, prevention, resources
Counseling to promote informed choices and adaptation to the risk or condition.
A genetic counselor is an expert with a Master of Science degree in genetic counseling. In the United States they are certified by the American Board of Genetic Counseling.[1] In Canada, genetic counselors are certified by the Canadian Association of Genetic Counsellors. Most enter the field from a variety of disciplines, including biology, genetics, nursing, psychology, public health and social work. Genetic counselors should be expert educators, skilled in translating the complex language of genomic medicine into terms that are easy to understand.
Genetic counselors work as members of a health care team and act as patient advocates as well as genetic resources to physicians. Genetic counselors provide information and support to families who have members with birth defects or genetic disorders, and to families who may be at risk for a variety of inherited conditions. They identify families at risk, investigate the problems present in the family, interpret information about the disorder, analyze inheritance patterns and risks of recurrence, and review available genetic testing options with the family.
Genetic counselors are present at high risk or specialty prenatal clinics that offer prenatal diagnosis, pediatric care centers, and adult genetic centers. Genetic counseling can occur before conception (i.e. when one or two of the parents are carriers of a certain trait) through to adulthood (for adult onset genetic conditions, such as Huntington's disease or hereditary cancer syndromes).


== State licensure for genetic counselors ==
Only some states issue licensure to genetic counselors. These states are California, Connecticut, Delaware, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Tennessee, Utah, and Washington. States with bills passed/in rulemaking are Hawaii, Minnesota, and Virginia.
Graduates from an ABGC (American Board of Genetic Counseling) accredited program who have met specific criteria are eligible to take the examination which is offered twice per year by the ABGC. Although not every company requires its counselors to possess a certification, the certification shows that the practitioner has met the standards necessary to provide competent genetic counseling services.
Although genetic counseling has existed for over four decades, the first licenses for genetic counselors were not issues until 2002. Utah was the first state to do so. The American Society of Human Genetics (ASHG) has since encouraged more states to license genetic counselors before they are allowed to practice. The ASHG argues that requiring practitioners to go through the necessary training and testing to obtain a license will ensure quality genetic services as well as allow for reimbursement for counselors services. Laws requiring licensure ensure that professionals who call themselves genetic counselors are able to properly explain complicated test results that could confuse patients and families making important health decisions.


=== Reimbursement and recognition ===
Insurance companies do not reimburse for unlicensed genetic counselors services. Patients who may benefit from genetic counseling may not be able to afford the service due to the expensive out-of-pocket cost. In addition, licensure allows genetic counselors to be searchable in insurance companies databases which gives genetic counselors increased opportunities for earning revenue and clients the opportunity to see the level of coverage insurers provide for their services.


== Patients ==
Any person may seek out genetic counseling for a condition they may have inherited from their biological parents.
A woman, if pregnant, may be referred for genetic counseling if a risk is discovered through prenatal testing (screening or diagnosis). Some clients are notified of having a higher individual risk for chromosomal abnormalities or birth defects. Testing enables women and couples to make a decision as to whether or not to continue with their pregnancy, and helps provide information that can be used to prepare for the birth of a child with medical issues.
A person may also undergo genetic counseling after the birth of a child with a genetic condition. In these instances, the genetic counselor explains the condition to the patient along with recurrence risks in future children. In all cases of a positive family history for a condition, the genetic counselor can evaluate risks, recurrence and explain the condition itself.


== Counseling session structure ==
The goals of genetic counseling are to increase understanding of genetic diseases, discuss disease management options, and explain the risks and benefits of testing. Counseling sessions focus on giving vital, unbiased information and non-directive assistance in the patient's decision-making process. Seymour Kessler, in 1979, first categorized sessions in five phases: an intake phase, an initial contact phase, the encounter phase, the summary phase, and a follow-up phase. The intake and follow-up phases occur outside of the actual counseling session. The initial contact phase is when the counselor and families meet and build rapport. The encounter phase includes dialogue between the counselor and the client about the nature of screening and diagnostic tests. The summary phase provides all the options and decisions available for the next step. If counselees wish to go ahead with testing, an appointment is organized and the genetic counselor acts as the person to communicate the results.


== Reasons for testing ==
Families or individuals may choose to attend counseling or undergo prenatal testing for a number of reasons.
Family history of a genetic condition or chromosome abnormality
Molecular test for single gene disorder
Increased maternal age (35 years and older)
Increased paternal age (40 years and older)
Abnormal maternal serum screening results or ultrasound findings
Increased nuchal translucency measurements on ultrasound
Strong family history of cancer
Predictive testing for adult-onset conditions


=== Detectable conditions ===
Many disorders cannot occur unless both the mother and father pass on their genes, such as Cystic Fibrosis. Some diseases can be inherited from one parent, such as Huntington disease, and DiGeorge syndrome. Other genetic disorders are the cause of an error or mutation occurring during the cell division process (e.g.trisomy). Testing can reveal conditions that are easily treatable as long as they are detected (Phenylketonuria or PKU). Genetic tests are available for a number of genetic conditions including but not limited to:


=== Hereditary Cancer ===
Patients may be referred to a genetic counselor based on their cancer diagnosis, or a strong family history of cancer. It is estimated that only 5-10% of cancers are hereditary, meaning that these cancers are due to a gene mutation that has been passed down in the family. Some examples of known cancer syndromes are hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome, hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Meeting with a genetic counselor before undergoing genetic testing will help an individual to understand the test and what the results may mean for themselves and their family. Once the results are received, genetic counselors can help the patient to understand a positive or negative result. This counseling may involve providing emotional support, discussing recommendations for preventative care, screening recommendations or referrals to support groups or other resources. For patients who have already been diagnosed with cancer, a positive test result may influence how the cancer is treated.


== Genetic counselors as support ==
Genetic Alliance states that counselors provide supportive counseling to families, serve as patient advocates and refer individuals and families to community or state support services. They serve as educators and resource people for other health care professionals and for the general public. Many engage in research activities related to the field of medical genetics and genetic counseling. The field of genetic counseling is rapidly expanding and many counselors are taking on "non-traditional roles" which includes working for genetic companies and laboratories. When communicating increased risk, counselors anticipate the likely distress and prepare patients for the results. Counselors help clients cope with and adapt to the emotional, psychological, medical, social, and economic consequences of the test results.
Each individual considers their family needs, social setting, cultural background, and religious beliefs when interpreting their risk. Clients must evaluate their reasoning to continue with testing at all. Counselors are present to put all the possibilities in perspective and encourage clients to take time to think about their decision. When a risk is found, counselors frequently reassure parents that they were not responsible for the result. An informed choice without pressure or coercion is made when all relevant information has been given and understood.


=== Prenatal genetic counseling ===
If an initial noninvasive screening test reveals a risk to the baby, clients are encouraged to attend genetic counseling to learn about their options. Further prenatal investigation is beneficial and provides helpful details regarding the status of the fetus, contributing to the decision-making process. Decisions made by clients are affected by factors including timing, accuracy of information provided by tests, and risk and benefits of the tests. Counselors present a summary of all the options available. Clients may accept the risk and have no future testing, proceed to diagnostic testing, or take further screening tests to refine the risk. Invasive diagnostic tests possess a small risk of miscarriage (1-2%) but provide more definitive results. While families seek direction and suggestions from the counselors, they are reassured that no right or wrong answer exists. When discussing possible choices, counselor discourse predominates and is characterized by examples of what some people might do. Discussion enables people to place the information and circumstances into the context of their own lives. Clients are given a decision-making framework they can use to situate themselves. Counselors focus on the importance of individual choice based on the experiences, morals, and viewpoints of the couple/individual/family. Testing is offered to provide a definitive answer regarding the presence of a certain genetic condition or chromosomal abnormality. There is often no therapy or treatment available for these conditions, and as such parents may choose to terminate the pregnancy.


=== Referral ===
After attending prenatal counseling, women have the option of accepting the risk revealed and having no further investigations during their pregnancy. They may choose to undergo noninvasive screening (e.g. ultrasound, triple screen, cell-free fetal DNA screening) or invasive diagnostic testing (amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling).
After counseling for other hereditary conditions, the patient may be presented with the option of having genetic testing. In some circumstances no genetic testing is indicated, other times it may be useful to begin the testing process with an affected family member. The genetic counselor also reviews the advantages and disadvantages of genetic testing with the patient.


== Attitudes toward counseling ==
The plethora of information available can be overwhelming and counselors spend a large proportion of time clarifying details. Prenatal screening was first introduced nearly four decades ago, yet gaps still exist in public knowledge about the screening program. The general public is familiar with Down syndrome (trisomy 21), but is not aware of more uncommon conditions such as trisomy 18 (historically known as Edwards syndrome) and trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome). Clients are usually aware of diagnostic testing from friends, TV/press, or because of family history.
No simple correlation has been found between the change in technology to the changes in values and beliefs towards genetic testing.


== Genetic counseling in China ==
In China, genetic counseling is steered by the Chinese Board of Genetic Counseling (CBGC), a not-for-profit organization. CBGC is composed of senior experts engaged in the genetics teaching and scientific researches. CBGC is committed to establishing standardized procedures of genetic counseling, training qualified genetic counselors, improving health for all, and reducing birth defects.


== Psychotherapeutic genetic counseling ==
Whether the process of genetic counseling is a form of psychotherapy is up for debate. The relationship between the client and counselor is similar as are the goals of the sessions. As a psychotherapist aims to help his client improve his wellbeing, a genetic counselor also helps his client to address a situational health threat that similarly threatens client wellbeing. Due to the lack of studies which compare genetic counseling to the practice of psychotherapy, it is hard to say with certainty whether genetic counseling can be conceptualized as a short-term, applied, specific type of psychotherapy. However, there few existing studies suggest that genetic counseling falls significantly short of psychotherapeutic counseling because genetic counseling sessions primarily consist of the distribution of information without much emphasis placed on explaining any long-term impacts to the client.


== Psychiatric genetic counseling ==
Psychiatric genetic counseling is a controversial topic among many in the medical community. Some question its legitimacy due to the unknown etiology of many psychiatric disorders. While many disorders have shown to have a genetic basis in twin studies, such knowledge means little for psychiatric genetic counseling if the exact genetic mechanism is still unknown. Those who support psychiatric genetic counseling argue that doctors can now do much more than offer risk estimates. Psychiatric genetic counselors can help dispel mistaken notions about psychiatrist disorders, calm needless anxiety, and help those at risk to draw up a rational plan of action based on the best available information.


== See also ==
Whole genome sequencing
National Society of Genetic Counselors
Reprogenetics
Genomic counseling


== Footnotes ==


== Further reading ==
Alexandra Minna Stern, Telling Genes: The Story of Genetic Counseling in America. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012.


== External links ==
National Society of Genetic Counselors
American Board of Genetic Counseling
Canadian Association of Genetic Counsellors
Association of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors (UK)
EuroGentest
Chinese Board of Genetic CounselingThe GNOME Mobile & Embedded Initiative (GMAE), also known as GNOME Mobile, is an initiative for developing and promoting the use of the GNOME platform in mobile devices. It was announced at the Embedded Linux Conference in Santa Clara, California on April 19, 2007.


== Software architecture ==
GNOME Mobile strips a lot of the old deprecated stuff that still needs to hang around on the desktop for backward compatibility, and adds mobile-specific components like matchbox (window manager), a window manager thats highly tuned for mobile integrated devices. GNOME mobile uses and optimizes the mainline codebase as used in the Desktop, in the same way you have the same core Linux kernel from a phone up to a huge supercomputer.
Core infrastructure: Linux kernel, systemd, PulseAudio, X/Wayland, Glib and D-Bus,
matchbox (window manager)
Toolkit for the user interface
GTK+ toolkit, incorporating Pango, Cairo or ATK
the Gstreamer multimedia framework
Telepathy
Avahi network service discovery
Evolution Data Server for contacts and calendaring
BlueZ Bluetooth support

2007-04-23 GNOME Foundation announces embedded initiative
2009-01-16 Paul Cooper


== Future features ==
Tinymail
GeoClue geolocation service
Java Mobile & Embedded (Java ME)
PulseAudio audio management
HAL hardware information system


== Current uses ==
Nokia 770 and N800 Internet Tablets
Nokia N900 Mobile Computer
the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project
Openmoko Linux mobile phones such as Neo FreeRunner


== Founding groups ==
ACCESS
Canonical Ltd.
Igalia
Intel
Debian
Nokia
Red Hat
Fluendo
Linux Foundation
Maemo
OpenedHand


== References ==


== External links ==
GNOME Mobile & Embedded Initiative
Ars Technica - GNOME Foundation announces embedded initiativeIn general, compliance means conforming to a rule, such as a specification, policy, standard or law. Regulatory compliance describes the goal that organisations aspire to achieve in their efforts to ensure that they are aware of and take steps to comply with relevant laws and regulations.
Due to the increasing number of regulations and need for operational transparency, organizations are increasingly adopting the use of consolidated and harmonized sets of compliance controls. This approach is used to ensure that all necessary governance requirements can be met without the unnecessary duplication of effort and activity from resources.


== Standards and regulations ==
The International Organization for Standardisation (ISO) produces international standards such as ISO/IEC 27002. The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) produces international standards in the electrotechnology area. The ISO 19600:2014 standard provides a reminder of how compliance and risk should operate together, as colleagues sharing a common framework with some nuances to account for their differences.
Some local or international specialized organizations such as the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) also develop standards and regulation codes. They thereby provide a wide range of rules and directives to ensure compliance of the products to safety, security or design standards.
There are a number of other regulations which apply in different fields, such as PCI-DSS, GLBA, FISMA, Joint Commission and HIPAA. In some cases other compliance frameworks (such as COBIT) or standards (NIST) inform on how to comply with the regulations.


== USA ==
Corporate scandals and breakdowns such as the Enron case of reputational risk in 2001 have highlighted the need for stronger compliance and regulations for publicly listed companies. The most significant regulation in this context is the SarbanesOxley Act developed by two U.S. congressmen, Senator Paul Sarbanes and Representative Michael Oxley in 2002 which defined significantly tighter personal responsibility of corporate top management for the accuracy of reported financial statements.
The Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is an agency of the United States Department of the Treasury under the auspices of the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence. OFAC administers and enforces economic and trade sanctions based on U.S. foreign policy and national security goals against targeted foreign states, organizations, and individuals.
Compliance in the USA generally means compliancy with laws and regulations. These laws can have criminal or civil penalties or can be regulations. The definition of what constitutes an effective compliance plan has been elusive. Most authors, however, continue to cite the guidance provided by the United States Sentencing Commission in Chapter 8 of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.
On October 12, 2006, the U.S. Small Business Administration re-launched Business.gov (new Business.USA.gov) which provides a single point of access to government services and information that help businesses comply with government regulations.


== UK ==
There is considerable regulation in the UK, some of which is from EU legislation. Various areas are policed by different bodies, such as the FCA (Financial Conduct Authority), Environment Agency and Scottish Environment Protection Agency, Information Commissioner's Office, CQC and others.
Important compliance issues for all organisations large and small include the Data Protection Act 1998 and, for the public sector, Freedom of Information Act 2000.
The UK Corporate Governance Code (formerly the Combined Code) is issued by the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) and sets out standards of good practice in relation to board leadership and effectiveness, remuneration, accountability and relations with shareholders. All companies with a Premium Listing of equity shares in the UK are required under the Listing Rules to report on how they have applied the Combined Code in their annual report and accounts (The Codes are therefore most similar to the US' Sarbanes-Oxley Act).


== Australia ==
Standards Australia revised the standard titled "AS 3806 - Compliance Programs". While many aspects of the original standard produced in 1998 standard appear in the 2006 version there are additional principles covered. The regulators in Australia continue to endorse and encourage (by regulation) the use of the standard when establishing a compliance framework.
The regulators are the Australian Securities and Investment Commission, AUSTRAC (for AML), ATO (for FATCA and CRS) and the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA).
Compliance demands in the superannuation industry continue to increase due to the new licensing regime implemented by APRA. The new licensing regime requires trustees of superannuation funds to demonstrate to APRA that they have adequate resources (human, technology and financial), risk management systems and appropriate skills and expertise to manage the superannuation fund. The licensing regime has lifted the bar for superannuation trustees with a significant number of small to medium size superannuation funds exiting the Industry due to the increasing risk and compliance demands.
The 19600 standard on Compliance Management Systems reflects largely the existing AS 3806-2006 standard, which it will replace.


== Canada ==
See Keeping the Promise for a Strong Economy Act (Budget Measures), 2002, commonly known as C-SOX or "Bill 198".


== India ==
In India, compliance regulation takes place across three strata: Central, State, and Local regulation. India veers towards central regulation, especially of financial organizations and foreign funds. Compliance regulations vary based on the industry segment in addition to the geographical mix. Most regulation comes in the following broad categories: economic regulation, regulation in the public interest, and environmental regulation. India has also been characterized by poor compliance - reports suggest that only around 65% of companies are fully compliant to norms.
Software packages are now available to handle routine regulatory filings and manage compliance.


== Challenges ==
Data retention is a part of regulatory compliance that is proving to be a challenge in many instances. The security that comes from compliance with industry regulations can seem contrary to maintaining user privacy. Data retention laws and regulations ask data owners and other service providers to retain extensive records of user activity beyond the time necessary for normal business operations. These requirements have been called into question by privacy rights advocates.
Compliance in this area is becoming very difficult. Laws like the CAN-SPAM Act and Fair Credit Reporting Act in the U.S. require that businesses give people the right to be forgotten. In other words, they must remove individuals from marketing lists if it is requested, tell them when and why they might share personal information with a third party, or at least ask permission before sharing that data. Now, with new laws coming out that demand longer data retention despite the individuals desires, it can create some real difficulties.


== Definitions ==
Compliance data is defined as all data belonging or pertaining to enterprise or included in the law, which can be used for the purpose of implementing or validating compliance. It is the set of all data that is relevant to a governance officer or to a court of law for the purposes of validating consistency, completeness, or compliance. Compliance software is increasingly being implemented to help company's manage their compliance data more efficiently.


== See also ==
China Compulsory Certificate
Business Motivation Model. A standard for recording governance and compliance activities
Call Report
Chief compliance officer
Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance
Compliance and ethics program
Enforcement
Health Care Compliance Association
Law enforcement agency
Law enforcement templates by country or region
Society of Corporate Compliance and Ethics


== References ==


== External links ==
Business.USA.gov, Official U.S. Government Portal for Complying with Regulations.
European Project COMPAS, European Project COMPAS - Compliance-driven Models, Languages, and Architectures for Services; funded by the EU 7th Framework Programme Information and Communication Technologies Objective.The MIT Department of Economics is a department of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Undergraduate studies in economics were introduced in the 19th century by institute president Francis Amasa Walker, while the department's Ph.D. program was introduced in 1941. It is one of the "big five" schools in the field along with the faculties at the University of Chicago, Harvard, Princeton, and Stanford (these schools have consistently ranked as the top five schools in the country since graduate school rankings have been produced by U.S. News & World Report). The American Economics Association estimates that MIT and these peers produce half of all tenure track professors at U.S. research universities.


== Prominent faculty ==
Paul Samuelson (19402009), Nobel Prize, 1970
Franco Modigliani (19622003), Nobel Prize, 1985
John Williamson (19671980), originator of the 'Washington Consensus'
Robert Solow, Nobel Prize, 1987
Stanley Fischer, (19771999), governor, Bank of Israel
Robert F. Engle, Nobel Prize, 2003
Daniel McFadden, Nobel Prize 2000
George P. Shultz, Former Secretary of State, Secretary of Treasury, Secretary of Labour
Myron S. Scholes Nobel prize in 1997 for the Black-Scholes equation
Rudi Dornbusch
Francesco Giavazzi


== Alumni ==
Lawrence Klein (Ph.D., 1944), Nobel Prize, 1980
Robert Mundell (Ph.D., 1956), Nobel Prize, 1999
George Akerlof (Ph.D., 1966), Nobel Prize 2001
Joseph E. Stiglitz (Ph.D., 1967), Nobel Prize, 2001
William Nordhaus (Ph.D., 1967), Council of Economic Advisers 1977 - 1979
Robert C. Merton (Ph.D, 1970), Nobel Prize, 1997
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, (M.Sc. 1970), European Central Bank Executive Board 1998-2005, Former Italian Minister of Economy and Finance
Martin Neil Baily (Ph.D., 1972), Council of Economic Advisers Chairman 1999 - 2001
Lawrence Summers (B.S., 1975) Secretary of the Treasury, 19992001
Mario Draghi (Ph.D., 1976) President of the European Central Bank 2011-, Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum
Paul Krugman (Ph.D., 1977), Nobel Prize, 2008
Lucas Papademos, (Ph.D. 1977), European Central Bank Vice President 2002 -
Ben Bernanke, (Ph.D., 1979) Chairman of the Federal Reserve, 2006 -
N. Gregory Mankiw (Ph.D., 1984), Council of Economic Advisers Chairman 2003 - 2005
Andrew Samwick (Ph.D. 1993), Council of Economic Advisers Chief Economist 2003 - 2004
Steven Levitt (Ph.D. 1994), John Bates Clark Medal, 2003; author Freakonomics
Esther Duflo (Ph.D. 1999), John Bates Clark Medal, 2010; co-author Poor Economics


== Nobel Laureates ==
Among the department's past and current faculty and alumni are several recipients of the Nobel Prize in Economics:
Bengt Holmstrom, 2016
Jean Tirole, 2014
Robert J. Shiller, 2013
Peter A. Diamond, 2010
Oliver E. Williamson, 2009
Paul Krugman, 2008
Eric Maskin, 2007
Edmund Phelps, 2006
Robert J. Aumann, 2005
Robert F. Engle, 2003
George Akerlof and Joseph Stiglitz, 2001
Daniel McFadden, 2000
Robert Mundell, 1999
Amartya Sen, 1998
Robert C. Merton, 1997
Robert Solow, 1987
Franco Modigliani, 1985
Lawrence Klein, 1980
Paul Samuelson, 1970


== Current Faculty ==


=== Professors ===
Daron Acemoglu
George-Marios Angeletos
Joshua Angrist
David Autor
Abhijit Banerjee
Olivier Blanchard [past Department Head]
Ricardo J. Caballero [current Department Head]
Victor Chernozhukov
Peter A. Diamond [past Department Head]
Esther Duflo
Glenn Ellison
Amy Finkelstein
Robert S. Gibbons
Michael Greenstone
Jonathan Gruber
Jeffrey Harris
Jerry A. Hausman
Bengt R. Holmstrm [past Department Head]
Whitney K. Newey
Michael J. Piore
James M. Poterba [past Department Head]
Drazen Prelec
Nancy Rose
Stephen Ross
Richard L. Schmalensee
Lester Thurow
Robert M. Townsend
Ivn Werning
William Wheaton
Benjamin Olken
Muhamet Yildiz


=== Associate Professors ===
Guido Lorenzoni
Stephen P. Ryan


=== Assistant Professors ===
Dave Donaldson
Panle Jia
Mihai Manea
Anna Mikusheva
Parag Pathak
Juuso Toikka
Heidi Williams


=== Senior Lecturer ===
Sara Fisher Ellison


=== Professors Emeriti ===
Morris Adelman
Sidney Alexander
Robert L. Bishop [former Department Head, former Dean School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences]
Richard S. Eckaus [past Department Head]
Franklin M. Fisher
Stanley Fischer [past Department Head]
Paul Joskow [past Department Head]
Jerome Rothenberg
Paul Samuelson
Abraham J. Seigel
Robert Solow
Peter Temin [past Department Head]


== Affiliated Faculty ==
Mathias Dewatripont
Ernst Fehr
Jean Tirole


== Former Faculty ==
Susan Athey (Ph.D., Stanford) John Bates Clark Medal, 2007
E. Cary Brown (Ph.D., Harvard) Professor of Economics, Emeritus
Evsey Domar (Ph.D., Harvard)
Rudi Dornbusch (Ph.D., Chicago) Ford International Professor, International Economics
Robert F. Engle (Ph.D., Cornell)
Stanley Fischer (Ph.D., MIT)
Charles P. Kindleberger (Ph.D., Columbia) Ford International Professor of Economics, Emeritus
Edwin Kuh (Ph.D., Harvard)
Paul Krugman (Ph.D., MIT) John Bates Clark Medal, 1991
Eric Maskin (Ph.D., Harvard)
Daniel McFadden (Ph.D., Minnesota)
Franco Modigliani (D.Jur., Rome and D.Soc.Sci., New School of Research) Institute Professor Emeritus; Professor of Finance & Economics
George P. Shultz (Ph.D., MIT)
Hal Varian (Ph.D., Berkeley)


== Notable alumni ==
Lawrence R. Klein (Ph.D., 1944) John Bates Clark Medalist, 1959; President of the Econometric Society, 1960; President of the American Economic Association, 1977; Laureate of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 1980
George P. Shultz (Ph.D., 1949) Distinguished Fellow of the American Economic Association, 2004
Mario Draghi (Ph.D., 1976) Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, President of the European Central Bank
Robert A. Mundell (Ph.D., 1956) Distinguished Fellow of the American Economic Association, 1996; Laureate of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 1999
Peter A. Diamond (Ph.D., 1963) President of the Econometric Society, 1991; President of the American Economic Association, 2003; Laureate of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 2010
Riccardo Faini, (PhD), Former Head of the Economic and Financial Analysis Service of the Italian Ministry of Treasury
George A. Akerlof (Ph.D., 1966) Laureate of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 2001; President of the American Economic Association, 2006
Joseph E. Stiglitz (Ph.D., 1966) John Bates Clark Medalist, 1979; Laureate of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 2001
Jagdish N. Bhagwati (Ph.D., 1967) Distinguished Fellow of the American Economic Association, 2003
Robert E. Hall (Ph.D., 1967) President of the American Economic Association, 2010
William D. Nordhaus (Ph.D., 1967) Member of the Council of Economic Advisers, 19771979; Distinguished Fellow of the American Economic Association, 2004; President of the American Economic Association, 2014
Avinash K. Dixit (Ph.D., 1968) President of the Econometric Society, 2001; President of the American Economic Association, 2008
Roberto Perotti (Ph.D., 1991) Full Professor at Bocconi University; Former Associate Professor with tenure at Columbia University, 19912001
Michael Rothschild, (Ph.D., 1968) Distinguished Fellow of the American Economic Association, 2005
Stanley Fischer (Ph.D., 1969) Governor of the Bank of Israel; Distinguished Fellow of the American Economic Association, 2013
Andrea Ichino (Ph.D., 1990) Full Professor at University of Bologna; Former Professor at European University Institute, 19972005
Robert C. Merton (Ph.D., 1970) President of the American Finance Association, 1986; Laureate of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 1997
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (M.Sc., 1970) European Central Bank Executive Board, 19982005
Jeremy J. Siegel (Ph.D., 1971) financial markets guru
Martin Neil Baily (Ph.D., 1972) Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, 19992001
Robert J. Shiller (Ph.D., 1972) Fellow of the American Finance Association, 2006; Laureate of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 2013
Paul R. Krugman (Ph.D., 1977) Member of the Council of Economic Advisers, 19821983; John Bates Clark Medalist, 1991; Laureate of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 2008
Lucas Papademos (Ph.D., 1977) Vice President of the European Central Bank, 2002-
Ben S. Bernanke (Ph.D., 1979) Chairman of the Federal Reserve, 2006-2014
Kenneth S. Rogoff (Ph.D., 1980) IMF Chief Economist
Jean Tirole (Ph.D., 1981) President of the Econometric Society, 1998; President of the European Economic Association, 2001; Laureate of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 2014
N. Gregory Mankiw (Ph.D., 1984) Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, 20032005
Andrei Shleifer (Ph.D., 1986) John Bates Clark Medalist, 1999
Matthew Rabin (Ph.D., 1989) John Bates Clark Medalist, 2001
Andrew Samwick (Ph.D., 1993) Member of the Council of Economic Advisers, 20032004
Steven D. Levitt (Ph.D., 1994) John Bates Clark Medalist, 2003; co-author of Freakonomics
Emmanuel Saez (Ph.D., 1999) John Bates Clark Medalist, 2009
Esther Duflo (Ph.D., 1999) John Bates Clark Medalist, 2010
Jonathan Levin (Ph.D., 1999) John Bates Clark Medalist, 2011
Amy Finkelstein (Ph.D., 2001) John Bates Clark Medalist, 2012
Alan S. Blinder (Ph.D., 1971) Distinguished Fellow of the American Economic Association, 2011
Robert J. Gordon (Ph.D., 1967) Distinguished Fellow of the American Economic Association, 2014
Ronald W. Jones (Ph.D., 1956) Distinguished Fellow of the American Economic Association, 2009


== External links ==
MIT Department of Economics websiteChautauqua Airlines, Inc., was an American regional airline and a subsidiary of Republic Airways Holdings based in Indianapolis, Indiana, United States. Prior to the shut down of operations, it operated scheduled passenger services to 52 airports in the United States and Canada via code sharing agreements as the Delta Connection for Delta Air Lines and AmericanConnection for American Airlines. Chautauqua previously flew feeder services for other airlines as well via code sharing agreements. Its last day in operation was December 31, 2014, at which time all flying was absorbed by the Shuttle America certificate.
Chautauqua had crew bases at LaGuardia Airport, John F. Kennedy International Airport, Louisville International Airport, and Port Columbus International Airport.


== History ==

Republic Airways Holdings traces it roots to Chautauqua. See also: History of Republic Airways Holdings
The airline was established on May 3, 1973, in Jamestown, Chautauqua County, New York, USA, and started operations on August 1, 1974 using two 15-passenger Beech 99 aircraft. In 1984, the airline grew by adding five 19-passenger Fairchild Metro III aircraft to its fleet. In 1986, Chautauqua Airlines was purchased by GAC, an affiliate of Guarantee Security Life Insurance Company, and added twelve 30-passenger Saab 340 aircraft to replace slower Shorts 3-30s in the fleet.
Chautauqua is historically significant for it is one of the last remaining companies still in business that once flew as a part of Allegheny Commuter, one of the first regional franchisee systems combining independent regional and commuter airlines under one seemingly contiguous and seamless brand. Ironically, it no longer services the Chautauqua County-Jamestown Airport from which it began.
In 1994, Chautauqua Airlines posted its first loss in 20 years. The loss can be attributed to the crash of American Eagle Flight 4184. Media coverage of the crash spread quickly, and because of its association, Chautauqua Airlines lost passengers who had come to distrust commuter planes. However, Chautauqua Airlines bounced back, while renewing its code-share agreement with US Airways on May 8, 1994. To better support its growing operations, the corporate headquarters were relocated to Indianapolis, Indiana.
Chautauqua was acquired by Wexford Management in January 1998 and was subsequently realigned under a holding company, Republic Airways Holdings.


=== Build up ===
In 1998, Chautauqua entered into an agreement with Embraer for the purchase of ten 50-seat Embraer ERJ-145 regional jet aircraft. In 1999, Chautauqua entered into a 10-year code-share agreement with Trans World Airlines to operate at least 15 ERJ-145s for the airline. In June 2001, American Airlines, who had purchased TWA, renewed the existing regional jet service with Chautauqua for feeder service at St. Louis using 44-seat ERJ-140 aircraft. In March 2001, Chautauqua entered into a partnership with America West to operate as an America West Express affiliate using 12 ERJ-145 jets in the Eastern United States, but ended this service in February 2003. In November 2002, Chautauqua began flying regional jet service to Florida for Delta Air Lines. In March 2004, United Airlines announced that Chautauqua Airlines would operate 16 50-seat regional jets for United Express.
In 2004, Republic Airways Holdings announced a new jet-service agreement with US Airways for the operation of Embraer E170 and Embraer E190 aircraft. Chautauqua was one of the first U.S. operators of the E170, but was forced to transfer these aircraft to sister company Shuttle America in 2005 after the pilots union at American Airlines claimed the aircraft violated a scope clause regulating the size of regional aircraft operated under American brands. In the first half of 2007, Chautauqua took delivery of 24 Bombardier CRJs and flew them under a code-share agreement with Continental Airlines. Some of these aircraft were previously owned by Atlantic Coast Airlines (Independence Air), and some were owned by Comair. Chautauqua eventually phased out all of its CRJ aircraft.
In early 2006, Chautauqua opened its new aircraft maintenance complex, capable of holding nine aircraft, at Louisville International Airport in Louisville, Kentucky. Maintenance is performed in Indianapolis, Columbus, Louisville, and St. Louis. The ERJ-135/140/145 heavy ("C-check") maintenance is performed in Columbus.
In April 2010, the Federal Aviation Administration proposed a US$348,000 fine against Chautauqua Airlines for allegedly not performing required inspections for three years. The FAA alleged that the airline flew an Embraer 145 jet for 43 days past the time one of its inertial navigation units should have been replaced.


=== Wind down ===
In October 2012, Republic Airways Holdings reworked a deal with partner Delta Air Lines, part of the company's broader effort to trim costs and boost revenue amid a decline in demand for regional airline service, to operate seven additional 50-seat Embraer 145 planes under the Delta Connection brand.
In the spring of 2014, Republic Airways Holdings announced that it would begin to pull down much of Chautauqua's flying. Specifically, it would not renew its contract with United Airlines to fly ERJ-145s out of Cleveland and that it would ground all 14 ERJ-145s on April 1 in response to a shortage of qualified pilots. This was shortly followed by an announcement that it would also not seek renewal of its AmericanConnection contract. Chautauqua's operation as AmericanConnection ended on August 18, 2014.
On July 28, 2014, Republic Airways Holdings announced that Chautauqua Airlines will be absorbed into Shuttle America "by year-end" to reduce costs. Chautauqua's only remaining aircraft, 41 ERJ-145s, will be transferred to the Shuttle America operating certificate, effectively abandoning Chautauqua's operating certificate. On December 31, 2014 Chautauqua operated its last flight for Delta Connection. All crew and maintenance bases will be absorbed by the Shuttle America certificate.


== Awards ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Republic Airways Holdings
List of destinations by Republic Airways carriersThis article is a list of pharmacy schools by country.


== A ==


=== Albania ===


=== Algeria ===


=== Argentina ===


=== Australia ===


=== Austria ===


== B ==


=== Bangladesh ===


=== Belgium ===


=== Bosnia and Herzegovina ===


=== Brazil ===


=== Bulgaria ===


== C ==


=== Cambodia ===


=== Canada ===


=== China ===


==== Beijing ====


==== Hong Kong ====


==== Jiangsu ====


==== Macau ====


==== Shanghai ====


=== Chile ===


=== Colombia ===


=== Costa Rica ===


=== Czech Republic ===


== D ==


=== Democratic Republic of Congo ===


=== Denmark ===


=== Dominican Republic ===


== E ==


=== Egypt ===


=== Estonia ===


=== Ethiopia ===


== F ==


=== Fiji ===


=== Finland ===


=== France ===


== G ==


=== Georgia ===


=== Germany ===


=== Greece ===


== H ==


=== Hungary ===


== I ==


=== Iceland ===


=== India ===


==== Andhra Pradesh ====


==== Chhattisgarh ====


==== Dadra and Nagar Haveli ====


==== Delhi ====


==== Gujarat ====


==== Haryana ====


==== Himachal Pradesh ====


==== Jammu and Kashmir ====


==== Karnataka ====


==== Kerala ====


==== Madhya Pradesh ====


==== Maharashtra ====


==== Punjab ====


==== Rajasthan ====


==== Sikkim ====


==== Tamil Nadu ====


==== Telangana ====


==== Uttar Pradesh ====


==== Uttarakhand ====


==== West Bengal ====


=== Indonesia ===


=== Iran ===


=== Iraq ===


=== Ireland ===


=== Israel ===


=== Italy ===


== J ==


=== Jamaica ===


=== Japan ===


=== Jordan ===


== K ==


=== Kenya ===


=== Kuwait ===


== L ==


=== Latvia ===


=== Lebanon ===


=== Libya ===


=== Lithuania ===


== M ==


=== Malaysia ===


=== Malta ===


=== Mexico ===


=== Montenegro ===


=== Morocco ===


=== Myanmar ===


== N ==


=== Nepal ===


=== Netherlands ===


=== New Zealand ===


=== North Korea ===


=== Norway ===


== P ==


=== Pakistan ===


=== Palestine ===


=== Peru ===


=== Philippines ===


=== Poland ===


=== Portugal ===


== Q ==


=== Qatar ===


== R ==


=== Republic of Macedonia ===


=== Romania ===


=== Russia ===


=== Rwanda ===


== S ==


=== Saudi Arabia ===


=== Serbia ===


=== Singapore ===


=== Slovakia ===


=== Slovenia ===


=== South Africa ===


=== South Korea ===


=== Spain ===


=== Sri Lanka ===


=== Sudan ===


=== Sweden ===


=== Switzerland ===


=== Syria ===


== T ==


=== Tajikistan ===


=== Taiwan (Republic of China) ===


=== Tanzania ===


=== Thailand ===


=== Trinidad and Tobago ===


=== Tunisia ===


=== Turkey ===


== U ==


=== Ukraine ===


=== Uganda ===


=== United Arab Emirates ===


=== United Kingdom ===


=== United States of America ===


==== Alabama ====


==== Arizona ====


==== Arkansas ====


==== California ====


==== Colorado ====


==== Connecticut ====


==== District of Columbia ====


==== Florida ====


==== Georgia ====


==== Hawaii ====


==== Idaho ====


==== Illinois ====


==== Indiana ====


==== Iowa ====


==== Kansas ====


==== Kentucky ====


==== Louisiana ====


==== Maine ====


==== Maryland ====


==== Massachusetts ====


==== Michigan ====


==== Minnesota ====


==== Mississippi ====


==== Missouri ====


==== Montana ====


==== Nebraska ====


==== Nevada ====


==== New Jersey ====


==== New Mexico ====


==== New York ====


==== North Carolina ====


==== North Dakota ====


==== Ohio ====


==== Oklahoma ====


==== Oregon ====


==== Pennsylvania ====


==== Puerto Rico ====


==== Rhode Island ====


==== South Carolina ====


==== South Dakota ====


==== Tennessee ====


==== Texas ====


==== Utah ====


==== Virginia ====


==== Vermont ====


==== Washington ====


==== West Virginia ====


==== Wisconsin ====


==== Wyoming ====


=== Uruguay ===


=== Uzbekistan ===


== V ==


=== Venezuela ===


=== Vietnam ===


== Z ==


=== Zambia ===


=== Zimbabwe ===


=== See also ===
History of pharmacy
List of medical schools


=== References ===


== External links ==Continuity or presentation (or station break in the U.S. and The Philippines) is a term used in broadcasting to refer to announcements, messages and graphics played by the broadcaster between specific programmes. It typically includes programme schedules, announcement of the programme immediately following and trailers or descriptions of forthcoming programmes. Continuity can be spoken by an announcer or displayed in text over graphics. On television continuity generally coincides with a display of the broadcaster's logo or ident. Advertisements are generally not considered part of continuity.
A continuity announcer is a broadcaster whose voice (and, in some cases, face) appears between radio or television programmes to give programme information. Continuity announcers tell viewers and listeners which channel they are watching or listening to at the moment (or which station they are tuned to), what they are about to see (or hear), and what they could be watching (or listening to) if they changed to a different channel operated by the broadcaster. At the end of programmes, they may read out information about the previous programme, for example who presented and produced it, relay information or merchandise relating to the show, or to provide details of organisations who may offer support in relation to a storyline or issue raised in the programme. Continuity announcers may also play music during intervals and give details of programmes later in the day. If there is a breakdown, they make any necessary announcements and often play music for its duration.


== Usage ==


=== Television ===
Television continuity announcements typically take one of two forms:
Out-of-vision, where only the announcer's voice is heard, either over the end sequence of a programme or on-screen graphics. With appropriate training in sound and vision mixing, this can be achieved with a single person acting as both voice and controller.
In-vision, where the announcer is seen delivering the announcement on-screen. This typically requires a number of people in a small studio, including sound engineers, vision mixers, and occasionally camera operators. Modern installations with motorised cameras can reduce this to two  the presenter, and a technical assistant to perform the "backstage" functions such as adjusting the camera and mixing. Typically, in-vision announcers are utilised today in smaller television markets, usually where private commercial channels were introduced late.
Currently, the following European television channels use in-vision announcers:
Belgium: Ketnet
Finland: YLE TV1 and Sub
Iceland: RV
Ireland: TG4
Norway: NRK1
Slovakia: Jednotka, Dvojka
Sweden: TV4
United Kingdom: CBBC, CBeebies, and BBC Alba


=== Radio ===
With most radio stations now broadcasting only music, few networks retain continuity announcers. Exceptions include talk stations such as National Public Radio in the United States, BBC Radio 4 and the BBC World Service in the UK and Swedish SR P1 : in the case of Radio 4 they have the extra tasks of reading the Shipping Forecasts and gale warnings. Many also serve as newsreaders.


== Continuity around the world ==


=== Canada ===
In Canada, CBC Television used in-vision announcers to 'host' primetime programming from 2001 to 2006. As the credits rolled, the announcer would describe upcoming episodes of the series, then introduce the next program at the top of the hour. The evening's host changed daily. Usually, the host was appearing in a major upcoming program the same week, giving the appearance that the host is promoting not only the next program in the evening but his or her own upcoming show. Sometimes CBC Radio newscasters or program hosts would appear as the evening TV hosts. The initiative, sometimes known as "Hosted Prime", only covered the CBC's core evening block (8:00 to 10:00 p.m. local) as opposed to programs in the 7:00 hour, and would not normally appear during the summer.
CBC Radio One has used continuity announcers in recent years. Originally, a number of staff announcers shared the duties, however, in 2004, the service began employing actress Shauna MacDonald as its primary continuity announcer. Her identity remained a secret for more than a year, leading her to be dubbed "Promo Girl". MacDonald has since been replaced by Jeremy Harris, serving in a similar capacity for both Radio One and Radio 2.
Omni Television in Toronto has used in-vision continuity announcers for the past 10 years or so. These "interstitial" segments fill in the time left in programming due to the different break structure of American TV programming, that cannot be filled by commercials in Canada due to Canadian broadcast regulations regarding the number of minutes of commercials allowable per hour. The segments range from 30 seconds to 2 minutes, and in addition to announcing the station and the programs coming up, the announcers will talk about other programming, station contests, quirky news or celebrity gossip.
Continuity announcements on Citytv have been voiced by actor Dan Aykroyd and journalist Mark Dailey.
Other Canadian stations will fill this time in by a news update or a teaser about news stories.


=== Flanders, Belgium ===
Until July 2015, n, VRT's main television station in the Flanders region of Belgium, used a team of four staff announcers, who performed in-vision and out-of-vision continuity links. VRT's children's station, Ketnet, also utilised in-vision continuity with announcing staff known on-air as Ketnetwrappers.
Vtm, the main commercial television channel in Flanders, uses live out-of-vision announcers. The station utilised in-vision continuity until January 2008. vtm's sister station, 2BE, only utilises pre-recorded voiceovers.
Both of SBS Belgium's television stations, VIER and VIJF no longer use any continuity announcers following the rebranding of the networks from VT4 and VIJFtv.


=== China ===
CCTV had offered in-vision continuity. However, this kind of segment has been withdrawn in recent years.


=== Germany ===
In German television, in-vision continuity was used until the mid-1990s. In-vision continuity announcers are known in German as ansager for a male announcer or ansagerin for a female announcer. Some stations still use pre-recorded voiceovers or use voiceovers for promos only.


=== Ireland ===
All domestic terrestrial channels in Ireland make use of continuity announcers, mainly to introduce programmes, promote forthcoming programmes, provide information relating to the programme just broadcast and, in the case of stations with sister channels, cross-promote programmes on the other channel (such as linking between RT One and Two, or TV3 and 3e).
RT One used in-vision continuity announcers until at least 2000. and in-vision continuity was briefly reprised in the late 1990s for overnight programmes.
RT Two used in-vision continuity announcers from its launch in November 1978 to at least 1986. In-vision continuity links were reprised on the channel, then known as Network 2, during the evening schedule, from 1997 to 2001.
From January 2008, the daytime schedule on TV3 launched with two new in-vision continuity annnouncers, Conor Clear and Andrea Hayes.
TG4 makes regular use of in-vision continuity during its evening schedule. Currently, TG4 employ six continuity announcers:
Mairad N Chuaig
Fedelma N Righne
Cormac  Loidein
Dith  S
Sinad N Loidein
Aoife N Thuairisg
The station's announcers also present weather forecasts in-vision, and often mention forthcoming programmes during the weather bulletins.


=== Italy ===
Continuity announcers still appear in-vision on the three main RAI channels, where female continuity announcers are known as signorine buonasera (or 'good evening ladies'), although their role is much more marginal than it used to be. Past continuity announcers such as Nicoletta Orsomando or Rosanna Vaudetti are regarded today as cultural icons of the 1960s, particularly because of their impeccable elegance and perfect pronunciation of Italian. Since 2003, all in-vision links on Rai Uno, Rai Due and Rai Tre have been pre-recorded by a smaller team of station announcers.

Other Italian channels such as Retequattro, Canale 5 and Italia 1 also used their own team of signorine buonasera in the 1980s and 1990s.


=== Japan ===
In Japan, continuity segments on most TV stations are done by airing a program specifically for program promotion which is called (, bansen bangumi) which airs for a few minutes or longer. They are produced by the stations themselves and air at certain periods of the day and act as program fillers. The station's announcers present the program and introduce its upcoming programs on the station by airing clips from the program or air a promo. Some of the bansen bangumi are NHK Premap on NHK.


=== North Korea ===
Korean Central Television still offers in-vision continuity.


=== Sweden ===
In Sweden, a continuity announcer (or programme presenter) is informally known as a halla, which roughly means "helloer". This comes from the early days of radio when the main station in Stockholm contacted the other stations around the country by calling "hall, hall". Continuity announcers have been present on Swedish public television since November 1957. Initially, Sveriges Radio employed a team of both male and female announcers, but in the 1960s, the announcers became almost solely female. Male announcers returned in the 1970s.
Both Kanal 1 and TV2, as well as the educational television service UR, continued to use in-vision announcers from the 1970s through to the 1990s, except for a few years in the early nineties when Kanal 1 (now SVT1) switched to out-of-vision continuity. In a cost-cutting exercise, SVT decided to drop live in-vision announcing from SVT2 in January 2005 and introduced pre-recorded voice-overs by SVT's announcing staff. The educational broadcaster UR dropped in-vision announcers by the end of 2006. A further review of SVT presentation led to the end of in-vision continuity on SVT1 on Sunday 4 March 2012. All SVT stations now use out-of-vision announcers.
The largest commercial channel, TV4 has utilised in-vision announcers since it began broadcasting in 1990. Most other commercial channels broadcast from London and use out-of-vision announcers. Private channels with out-of-vision announcers include TV3, Kanal 5, TV6, Kanal 9 and TV4 Plus.


=== Southeast Asia ===
Today, in-vision announcers are used in Southeast Asia, especially in Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia and Vietnam.
This list is Southeast Asian channels still using in-vision announcers:
Cambodia: TV3 (program menu also used), TV5 (military announcer)
Indonesia: TVRI, SCTV and Trans 7
Laos: Lao National Television (not used as usual)
Malaysia:
Singapore: TV3
Thailand: TV7, TV3 (Program menu also used,After 2011 Program menu appears at right of announcer.), TV5
Vietnam: Binh Thuan Television


=== Taiwan ===
Pre-recorded continuity announcements are offered on the TV channels in Taiwan.


=== United Kingdom ===

Continuity is used heavily in the United Kingdom. In general, continuity announcers are broadcast live on terrestrial television channels (BBC One, etc.), whereas pre-recorded announcements are used most of the time on digital and satellite channels.


=== United States ===
Most major networks, including ABC (which from the late 1970s until the mid-1990s, Ernie Anderson was known as "The Voice of ABC-TV" who served as the promotional voice and continuity announcer for the network) , CBS, Fox, and NBC, use a pre-recorded Continuity instead of a live continuity and most of the continuities are usually those in between program. Neither any of those networks use In-Vision continuities and are solely out-of-vision. In addition to showing promotional content for upcoming programs and those about the program as well (such as showing a preview on the upcoming episode of a preceding program), most Stations with a newscast also give out a brief presentation on upcoming newscasts as well, some of would tease directly from the news studio for the news the viewer will see in the newscasts.
Some PBS member Stations and networks, most notably WNET during the 1980s also uses continuity announcers although continuities in the present day are now pre-recorded.


== See also ==
Bumper music, a similarly functioning idea used in talk radio in the United States
Copywriting
Flow (television)


== References ==Disney Consumer Products (DCP) is a subsidiary and business segment of The Walt Disney Company that engages in merchandising of the Disney brand and Disney properties.


== Background ==
DCP's origins trace back to 1929, when Walt Disney licensed the image of Mickey Mouse for use on a children's writing tablet. On December 16 of that year, Walt Disney Productions formed the Walt Disney Enterprises (WDE) division to handle merchandising.
The Mickey Mouse doll production by Charlotte Clark started shortly after in January 1930. The WDE division also hired George Borgfeldt & Company of New York as a licensing agent to make Mickey and Minnie Mouse toys. Borgfeldt & Company in turn set to work developing other products, granting the first license to Walkburger, Tanner and Company of St. Gall, Switzerland, for Mickey and Minnie Mouse handkerchiefs. That summer of 1930 Disney expanded WDE to England, granting a general license to William Banks Levy for Mickey and Minnie Mouse character merchandise.
In 1932 Disney closed a merchandising contract with Herman "Kay" Kamen for sole representation. Early on WDE began to show results. The company's merchandising made the Silly Symphony film Three Little Pigs (1933) the company's first profit-making animated feature.
In 1934, Disney licensing expanded to hand-crank toy projectors, diamond-studded Mickey Mouse pins, Mickey Mouse toffee in England and a Lionel wind-up train toy, while a patent is received for Ingersoll-Waterbury Clock Company's Mickey Mouse watch.
Yet more companies licensed the Mickey Mouse image. General Foods did so for one year and made $1.5 million on the Post Toasties cereal box. Mickey was the first licensed character on such a product. Clashes with other companies weren't unavoidable, though. Disney filed suit on July 31 against the United Biscuit Company of America, Sawyer Biscuit Company, and the Chicago Carton Company for unauthorized use of Disney characters for animal crackers which lasted for four months and ended in Disney's favor.
Disney signed on July 19, 1938 with Courvoisier Galleries, making Courvoisier Disney's original art marketing representative. In December, Walt Disney Enterprises was renamed Walt Disney Productions.
In October 1948, Disney and Kay Kamen extend the merchandising contract, but only for the Americas. In 1949, the Character Merchandising Division is formed with in Disney. Also that year on October 28, Kay Kamen, Disney's licensing representative, died in an Air France plane crash over the Azores.
With Roy Disney's split off the merchandising division from Disney Production, Jimmy Johnson became head of the merchandising division's publication department in 1950 and took on managing business affairs for the Walt Disney Music Company.
Disney had a food division with product from bread to soft drinks, which was mostly discontinued due to its contract with ABC to produce TV shows and the need to not be in competition with potential advertisers.
After Disney purchased the rights for Winnie the Pooh to make a 1966 animated short film, the company conceded to a broad licensing agreement with Sears, Roebuck & Co.. Stephen Slesinger Inc.'s Pati Slesinger found merchandise that Disney did not pay royalties on. The Slesinger then attempt to get the A.A. Milne Trust to abrogate its contract. In 1983, Disney paid Stephen Slesinger Inc. and the Milne estate to end the royalty issue and agreed to a new contract that lower Slesinger Inc.'s royalty percentage.
In 1979, the Intergovernmental Philatelic Corporation of New York was licensed by Walt Disney Productions to make Disney character stamps for several countries.


== History ==

Disney Consumer Products was incorporated with the State of California in 1986.
The first Disney Store opened in Glendale, California on March 28, 1987. On October 12, Disney agreed to a licensing contract with Mattel for a Disney Character infant and preschool toy line. DCP purchased Childcraft Education Corp., maker of children's furniture and equipment, retail stores and catalog sales, from Grolier Inc. in April 1988.
In April 1990, the 50th store was opened in Montclair, California along with the first Mickey's Kitchen fast food restaurant. On November 11, 1991, Mattel and Disney extended the 1987 agreement, adding Pinocchio, Bambi, Dumbo, It's a Small World, and the Autopia to the toy line. In March 1992, Disney Stores closed the two Mickey's Kitchen as the restaurants were only breaking even while well received by the customers as the company wanted to focus on overseas expansions.
In 1994, DCP ended an exclusive licensing agreement with Sears for Winnie the Pooh. Three distinct product lines were created for Pooh: Disney Pooh, based on the Disney red-shirted tan bear cartoon version; 100 Acre Collection, a more upscale line for department stores and the Classic Pooh line based on the original A.A. Milne books' Ernest H. Shephard illustrations.
DCP licensing peak in 1997 with 749 Disney Stores worldwide, operating income of $893 million and 4,200 licensees for mostly Winnie the Pooh and Mickey Mouse product plus some top animated movies. Disney's and McDonald's ten-year cross-promotional agreement began on January 1, 1997. In May 1997, the Vermont Teddy Bear Co. filed a copyright infringement suit against Disney over "Pooh-Grams" being similar to its mail-order "Bear-Gram" trademark and logo. Also, Disney Enterprises, Inc. sold DCP operating subsidiary Childcraft Education Corp. to U.S. Office Products Co.
In March 1998, Walt Disney Records and Walt Disney Music Publishing were transferred out of DCP to Buena Vista Music Group in the Disney studio division. By 1998, Pooh outsold Mickey Mouse $316 million to $114 million through November of that year in just-licensed-toy sales. By replacing Sears with 100 licensees including Mattel, Hallmark, Timex, Tupperware and Royal Daulton, DCP has since increased Pooh product lines from $390 million to $3.3 billion.


=== Franchise focus ===
With Mickey Mouse and other characters on products every where and a general retail decline in 2000, DCP had registered operating income of only $386 million. In December 1999, Andrew P. Mooney became the head of DCP. He created the Disney Princess franchise in January 2000. He also developed the Disney Couture fashion line, Walt Disney Signature furniture, a princess-inspired bridal gowns line, and lines based on the Pixar films, Toy Story and Cars. Mooney had DCP try an Always Fresh labeled women's nightshirts and T-shirts line which attempt to be more mature but failed. He also reduced the number of licensees in half, sold low sale stores and had staff actively pursuing licensing partners than waiting for proposals. For example, Mooney, worked to have Fred Segal, a high-end retailers, sell specialty products and opened a sales office near Wal-Mart's headquarters in Bentonville, Arkansas. In 2001, Mooney lead a promotion of Mickey Mouse T-shirts by getting them into the hands of celebrities, which was a success. Also, Disney Publishing issued its first original comic book, W.I.T.C.H., which was successful enough to be adapted into an animated series.
Consumer Products also begin expanding licensing in the food category in the 2000s. DCP agreed to a licensing agreement with Kellogg Company for a Kellogg's Disney cereal line launched in February 2002Kellogg's Disney Mickey's Magix, Kellogg's Disney Hunny Bs, and Kellogg's Disney/Pixar Buzz Blasts. In May 2003, DCP and Wells' Dairy launched a Disney-branded dairy line with a variety of new ice creams, frozen novelties and yogurt products. In May 2005, DCP licensed Krogers the Old Yeller name to sell dog food.
The Japanese stores were sold to Oriental Land Company in 2002, while most North American stores were sold and licensed in November 2004 to The Children's Place. Disney licensed Motorola for cordless phones and two way handset radios in August 2002.
For the first 3 quarters of 2004, Disney Consumer Products made $388 million in operating income placing the year ahead of 2000 and 2003. In May 2004, the Disney Cuties design (a more anime style) line was introduced with T-shirts. Mooney's major initiatives was to turn Disney into a lifestyle brand by relying on the Disney brand reputation instead of its characters to sell clothing and household goods with half the royalty percentage of the 10% for Disney characters. At Fred Segal in August, the retailer was test selling Snap watches, with swappable faces and wristbands, with Disney characters with hipper, urban designs. In Spring 2005, DCP planned to start sell pants and jean jackets under the Disney Denim brand with a cartoon whimsical elements. On August 5, 2004, the Disney Dream Desk PC, designed by Frog Design and manufactured by Medion, began being sold at CompUSA and Disney online. DCP planned to release a camcorder and digital camera later in the year.
Disney purchased the rights to The Muppets and the Bear in the Big Blue House franchises from The Jim Henson Company on February 17, 2004. The two brands were placed under control of the Muppets Holding Company, LLC, then as a unit of Disney Consumer Products.
In 2005, DCP has begun working with various Indian retail outlets to establish Disney Corners within the outlets to sell licensed merchandise. Also that year, Mooney formed the Disney Fairies franchise which launched in the fall with Fairy Dust and the Quest for the Egg book. In the early 2000s, DisneyToon Studios (DTS) joined DCP as their internal Disney conglomerate video partner in developing the new Disney franchises. While DCP eyed other potential franchises, DTS looked to the Seven Dwarfs for a male centric franchise to counterbalance the female centric Fairies by 2005.
In 2006, the Muppets Holding Company was transferred from the Disney Consumer Products unit to The Walt Disney Studios with studio executives passing on oversight, the unit was placed in the special events group. With Disney Princesses a success and Disney Fairies just under way in 2006, Consumer Products started looking into the next possible franchises with Disney Bunnies selected already. DCP in May concluded a consumer products master licensing agreement for Indochina, including Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, with East Media Holdings Inc.'s EMHI Licensing Inc. On September 26, the Disney Jeans brand was launched in India under license to Indus Clothing, who planned to open 30 Disney Jean stores by the end of 2007. In October, DCP India franchised to Ravi Jaipuria Corporation the rights for five years to set up 150 Disney Artist brand stores and wholesale under the Disney Artist brand Disney character branded greeting cards, stationary, arts, crafts and party product in India, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Maldives.
In January 2007 two new DCP franchises were launched, Disney Bunnies and Disney Dragonkind.
In 2008, Disney purchased back its Disney Stores from The Children's Place. On June 5, 2008, Disney Interactive Studios is transferred out of DCP to the Disney Interactive Media Group.
John Lasseter of Pixar became a creative advisor to DCP in 2009 after already assisting on Cars products. Lasseter pushed for an end to "label slapping", which is using a popular move to sell unrelated generic toys. The Disney Princesses franchise has generated more than $4 billion in retail sales worldwide. In post-Christmas 2009, Disney Pook-A-Looz, a plush line of Disney caricatures, was launched with its first set at Toy'R'Us with Disney Stores receiving them in mid-March 2010 with the Cheshire Cat selling well. The Muppets were considered the best sellers of the second set of Pook-A-Looz over the expected Nightmare Before Christmas characters.
In 2009, Disney acquired Marvel Entertainment for $4.24 billion. Josh Silverman, a senior executive at Marvel, was appointed Executive Vice President of Global Licensing for Disney Consumer Products and helped facilitate the Disney-Marvel integration. In 2011, Disney fired Marvel Studios' marketing department taking over marketing of their films beginning with the 2012 film The Avengers.
The Cars sequel was approved for a 2011 debut despite the original being panned by the critics and one of the lowest grossing Pixar film as its licensed products have done well. Mooney stepped down as DCP chair in September 2011. With Robert Chapek being appointed president of DCP, DCP expanded its responsibility to include all retailing, distribution and licensing for Marvel, Pixar, video discs and video games.
Swampy the Alligator from Where's My Water? was the first Disney Interactive Media Group original character to get the merchandising treatment by 2012. In 2012, Disney was the worlds largest licensor and number 1 in the entertainment category according to International Licensing Industry Merchandisers Association for another year with an 80% market share and $39.5 billion.
In March 2013, Disney sent a letter to its suppliers to have them by April 2014 pull any Disney branded products out of the five "highest-risk countries": Bangladesh, Ecuador, Venezuela, Belarus and Pakistan, based on a World Bank-governed metric report. This was announced in May after a Bangladeshi factory building collapsed. Haiti and Cambodia, which are also low-ranking countries, were allowable per Disney's new policy so long as the factories worked with the Better Work health and safety program run by the International Labor Organization and the International Finance Corporation. Bangladesh factories were liable to get work if they also partnered with the Better Work program. Disney also stated that less than 1% of its products were sourced from Bangladesh and even less from the other four countries.
DCP began representing Lucasfilm brands in June 2013. With the addition of Star Wars, Disney has six of the top 10 franchises; Disney Princess (1st), Star Wars (2nd), Winnie the Pooh (3rd), Cars (4th), Mickey & Friends (6th), and Toy Story (8th), with two more in the top twenty; Disney Fairies (11th) and Spider-Man (16th). In October, DCP announced an arrangement with Wet Seal for an ABC Family character inspired Crush by ABC Family apparel and accessories line to reach the shelves in 2014.
In April 2014, DCP was the subject of searing online criticism from numerous parents (through the Disney Store's Facebook page and other forums) for severely underestimating consumer demand for merchandise related to Disney Animation's 2013 blockbuster hit, Frozen. DCP saw its profit increase by 22% for the 2014 year.
On 000000002015-02-23-0000February 23, 2015, Robert Chapek was named chairman of Walt Disney Parks and Resorts effective that day. Leslie Ferraro, formerly executive vice president of global marketing, sales and travel operations of Walt Disney Parks and Resorts, was named president of DCP. DCPI was formed in 000000002015-06-01-0000June 2015 as merger of Disney Consumer Products and Disney Interactive. The presidents of DCP were appointed co-chairs of the division while retaining the presidency of their subsidiary while Disney Publishing Worldwide would report to them as co-chairs. Ferraro left Disney eight months later in February 2016.


== Franchises ==
Andrew P. Mooney of Disney Consumer Products (DCP) created the Disney Princess franchise in January 2000. In 2005, Mooney formed the Disney Fairies franchise which launched in the fall with Fairy Dust and the Quest for the Egg book. In the early 2000s, DisneyToon Studios (DTS) joined DCP as their internal Disney conglomerate video partner in developing the new Disney franchises. While Consumer Products eyed other potential franchises, DTS looked to the Seven Dwarfs for a male-centric franchise to counterbalance the female-centric Fairies by 2005. The Muppet franchise held by DCP, in Muppet Holding Company, after being purchased in 2004 and transferred out in 2006 to Disney Studios.
With Disney Princesses a success and Disney Fairies just under way in 2006, Disney Consumer Products started looking into the next possible franchises (see table at right) with Disney Bunnies selected already. In January 2007, two new DCP franchises were launched, Disney Bunnies with three books and Disney Dragonkind with a set of statues.
Complications relating to the production of Tinker Bell, the debut film of the Disney Fairies franchise lead to discussion over the focus of DisneyToon Studios. Pixar leadership exerted control and affected Franchise projects at the production company. Tinker Bell's animation was scrapped and was restarted while two possible franchise projects were cancelled, "Disney's Dwarfs" and the "Disney Princess Enchanted Tales" line after the first DVD release.
The June 2013 release of the Disney Princess Palace Pets app from Disney Publishing lead DCP to turn Palace Pets into a Disney Princess franchise extension with the release of The Palace Pets toy line in August from licensee, Blip Toys. The line was also listed by TimetoPlayMag.com for its Most Wanted List Holiday 2013.


== Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media ==
Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media (DCPI) is a division of the Walt Disney Company consisting of Disney Consumer Products (DCP), Disney Interactive (DI), Disney Publishing Worldwide (DPW) and DCPI Labs.
DCPI was formed in 000000002015-06-01-0000June 2015 as merger of Disney Consumer Products and Disney Interactive. The presidents of DCP were appointed co-chairs of the division while retaining the presidency of their subsidiary while Disney Publishing Worldwide would report to them as co-chairs. The units were brought together due to increase use of technology on the part of DCP with the announced Playmation toy system and digital publishing by DPW. In 2014, The Muppets Studio was transferred and reorganized into the division, as part of the newly formed DCPI Labs unit. In December 2015, Maker Studios was placed under the control of Disney Interactive with the appointment of Maker head executive vice president Courtney Holt reporting to Jimmy Pitaro, president of Disney Interactive. Ferraro left Disney eight months later in February 2016 with James Pitaro becoming sole chairman.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteA financial ratio or accounting ratio is a relative magnitude of two selected numerical values taken from an enterprise's financial statements. Often used in accounting, there are many standard ratios used to try to evaluate the overall financial condition of a corporation or other organization. Financial ratios may be used by managers within a firm, by current and potential shareholders (owners) of a firm, and by a firm's creditors. Financial analysts use financial ratios to compare the strengths and weaknesses in various companies. If shares in a company are traded in a financial market, the market price of the shares is used in certain financial ratios.
Ratios can be expressed as a decimal value, such as 0.10, or given as an equivalent percent value, such as 10%. Some ratios are usually quoted as percentages, especially ratios that are usually or always less than 1, such as earnings yield, while others are usually quoted as decimal numbers, especially ratios that are usually more than 1, such as P/E ratio; these latter are also called multiples. Given any ratio, one can take its reciprocal; if the ratio was above 1, the reciprocal will be below 1, and conversely. The reciprocal expresses the same information, but may be more understandable: for instance, the earnings yield can be compared with bond yields, while the P/E ratio cannot be: for example, a P/E ratio of 20 corresponds to an earnings yield of 5%.


== Sources of data for financial ratios ==
Values used in calculating financial ratios are taken from the balance sheet, income statement, statement of cash flows or (sometimes) the statement of changes in equity. These comprise the firm's "accounting statements" or financial statements. The statements' data is based on the accounting method and accounting standards used by the organisation.


== Purpose and types of ratios ==
Financial ratios quantify many aspects of a business and are an integral part of the financial statement analysis. Financial ratios are categorized according to the financial aspect of the business which the ratio measures. Liquidity ratios measure the availability of cash to pay debt. Activity ratios measure how quickly a firm converts non-cash assets to cash assets. Debt ratios measure the firm's ability to repay long-term debt. Profitability ratios measure the firm's use of its assets and control of its expenses to generate an acceptable rate of return. Market ratios measure investor response to owning a company's stock and also the cost of issuing stock. These are concerned with the return on investment for shareholders, and with the relationship between return and the value of an investment in company's shares.
Financial ratios allow for comparisons
between companies
between industries
between different time periods for one company
between a single company and its industry average
Ratios generally are not useful unless they are benchmarked against something else, like past performance or another company. Thus, the ratios of firms in different industries, which face different risks, capital requirements, and competition are usually hard to compare.


== Accounting methods and principles ==
Financial ratios may not be directly comparable between companies that use different accounting methods or follow various standard accounting practices. Most public companies are required by law to use generally accepted accounting principles for their home countries, but private companies, partnerships and sole proprietorships may not use accrual basis accounting. Large multi-national corporations may use International Financial Reporting Standards to produce their financial statements, or they may use the generally accepted accounting principles of their home country.
There is no international standard for calculating the summary data presented in all financial statements, and the terminology is not always consistent between companies, industries, countries and time periods.


== Abbreviations and terminology ==
Various abbreviations may be used in financial statements, especially financial statements summarized on the Internet. Sales reported by a firm are usually net sales, which deduct returns, allowances, and early payment discounts from the charge on an invoice. Net income is always the amount after taxes, depreciation, amortization, and interest, unless otherwise stated. Otherwise, the amount would be EBIT, or EBITDA (see below).
Companies that are primarily involved in providing services with labour do not generally report "Sales" based on hours. These companies tend to report "revenue" based on the monetary value of income that the services provide.
Note that Shareholders' Equity and Owner's Equity are not the same thing, Shareholder's Equity represents the total number of shares in the company multiplied by each share's book value; Owner's Equity represents the total number of shares that an individual shareholder owns (usually the owner with controlling interest), multiplied by each share's book value. It is important to make this distinction when calculating ratios.


=== Abbreviations ===
(Note: These are not ratios, but values in currency.)
COGS = Cost of goods sold, or cost of sales.
EBIT = Earnings before interest and taxes
EBITDA = Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization
EPS = Earnings per share


== Ratios ==


=== Profitability ratios ===
Profitability ratios measure the company's use of its assets and control of its expenses to generate an acceptable rate of return

Gross margin, Gross profit margin or Gross Profit Rate

  
    
      
        
          
            Gross Profit
            Net Sales
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Gross Profit}}{\mbox{Net Sales}}}}
   :::OR :::
  
    
      
        
          
            Net Sales -- COGS
            Net Sales
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Sales -- COGS}}{\mbox{Net Sales}}}}
  

Operating margin, Operating Income Margin, Operating profit margin or Return on sales (ROS)

  
    
      
        
          
            Operating Income
            Net Sales
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Operating Income}}{\mbox{Net Sales}}}}
  

Note: Operating income is the difference between operating revenues and operating expenses, but it is also sometimes used as a synonym for EBIT and operating profit. This is true if the firm has no non-operating income. (Earnings before interest and taxes / Sales)

Profit margin, net margin or net profit margin

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Profit
            Net Sales
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Profit}}{\mbox{Net Sales}}}}
  

Return on equity (ROE)

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Income
            Average Shareholders Equity
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Income}}{\mbox{Average Shareholders Equity}}}}
  

Return on assets (ROA ratio or Du Pont Ratio)

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Income
            Average Total Assets
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Income}}{\mbox{Average Total Assets}}}}
  

Return on assets (ROA)

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Income
            Total Assets
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Income}}{\mbox{Total Assets}}}}
  

Return on assets Du Pont (ROA Du Pont)

  
    
      
        
          (
          
            
              Net Income
              Net Sales
            
          
          )
        
        
          (
          
            
              Net Sales
              Total Assets
            
          
          )
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \left({\frac {\mbox{Net Income}}{\mbox{Net Sales}}}\right)\left({\frac {\mbox{Net Sales}}{\mbox{Total Assets}}}\right)}
  

Return on Equity Du Pont (ROE Du Pont)

  
    
      
        
          (
          
            
              Net Income
              Net Sales
            
          
          )
        
        
          (
          
            
              Net Sales
              Average Assets
            
          
          )
        
        
          (
          
            
              Average Assets
              Average Equity
            
          
          )
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \left({\frac {\mbox{Net Income}}{\mbox{Net Sales}}}\right)\left({\frac {\mbox{Net Sales}}{\mbox{Average Assets}}}\right)\left({\frac {\mbox{Average Assets}}{\mbox{Average Equity}}}\right)}
  

Return on net assets (RONA)

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Income
            Fixed Assets + Working Capital
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Income}}{\mbox{Fixed Assets + Working Capital}}}}
  

Return on capital (ROC)

  
    
      
        
          
            EBIT(1  Tax Rate)
            Invested Capital
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{EBIT(1  Tax Rate)}}{\mbox{Invested Capital}}}}
  

Risk adjusted return on capital (RAROC)

  
    
      
        
          
            Expected Return
            Economic Capital
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Expected Return}}{\mbox{Economic Capital}}}}
   :::OR :::
  
    
      
        
          
            Expected Return
            Value at Risk
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Expected Return}}{\mbox{Value at Risk}}}}
  

Return on capital employed (ROCE)

  
    
      
        
          
            EBIT
            Capital Employed
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{EBIT}}{\mbox{Capital Employed}}}}
  
Note: this is somewhat similar to (ROI), which calculates Net Income per Owner's Equity

Cash flow return on investment (CFROI)

  
    
      
        
          
            Cash Flow
            Market Recapitalisation
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Cash Flow}}{\mbox{Market Recapitalisation}}}}
  

Efficiency ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Non-Interest expense
            Revenue
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Non-Interest expense}}{\mbox{Revenue}}}}
  

Net gearing

  
    
      
        
          
            Net debt
            Equity
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net debt}}{\mbox{Equity}}}}
  

Basic Earnings Power Ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            EBIT
            Total Assets
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{EBIT}}{\mbox{Total Assets}}}}
  


=== Liquidity ratios ===
Liquidity ratios measure the availability of cash to pay debt.

Current ratio (Working Capital Ratio)

  
    
      
        
          
            Current Assets
            Current Liabilities
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Current Assets}}{\mbox{Current Liabilities}}}}
  

Acid-test ratio (Quick ratio)

  
    
      
        
          
            Current Assets -- (Inventories + Prepayments)
            Current Liabilities
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Current Assets -- (Inventories + Prepayments)}}{\mbox{Current Liabilities}}}}
  

Cash ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Cash and Marketable Securities
            Current Liabilities
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Cash and Marketable Securities}}{\mbox{Current Liabilities}}}}
  

Operating cash flow ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Operating Cash Flow
            Total Debts
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Operating Cash Flow}}{\mbox{Total Debts}}}}
  


=== Activity ratios (Efficiency Ratios) ===
Activity ratios measure the effectiveness of the firm's use of resources.

Average collection period

  
    
      
        
          
            Accounts Receivable
            Annual Credit Sales  365 Days
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Accounts Receivable}}{\mbox{Annual Credit Sales  365 Days}}}}
  

Degree of Operating Leverage (DOL)

  
    
      
        
          
            Percent Change in Net Operating Income
            Percent Change in Sales
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Percent Change in Net Operating Income}}{\mbox{Percent Change in Sales}}}}
  

DSO Ratio.

  
    
      
        
          
            Accounts Receivable
            Total Annual Sales  365 Days
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Accounts Receivable}}{\mbox{Total Annual Sales  365 Days}}}}
  

Average payment period

  
    
      
        
          
            Accounts Payable
            Annual Credit Purchases  365 Days
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Accounts Payable}}{\mbox{Annual Credit Purchases  365 Days}}}}
  

Asset turnover

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Sales
            Total Assets
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Sales}}{\mbox{Total Assets}}}}
  

Stock turnover ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Cost of Goods Sold
            Average Inventory
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Cost of Goods Sold}}{\mbox{Average Inventory}}}}
  

Receivables Turnover Ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Credit Sales
            Average Net Receivables
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Credit Sales}}{\mbox{Average Net Receivables}}}}
  

Inventory conversion ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            365 Days
            Inventory Turnover
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{365 Days}}{\mbox{Inventory Turnover}}}}
  

Inventory conversion period (essentially same thing as above)

  
    
      
        
          (
          
            
              Inventory
              Cost of Goods Sold
            
          
          )
        
        
          365 Days
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \left({\frac {\mbox{Inventory}}{\mbox{Cost of Goods Sold}}}\right){\mbox{365 Days}}}
  

Receivables conversion period

  
    
      
        
          (
          
            
              Receivables
              Net Sales
            
          
          )
        
        
          365 Days
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \left({\frac {\mbox{Receivables}}{\mbox{Net Sales}}}\right){\mbox{365 Days}}}
  

Payables conversion period

  
    
      
        
          (
          
            
              Accounts Payables
              Purchases
            
          
          )
        
        
          365 Days
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \left({\frac {\mbox{Accounts Payables}}{\mbox{Purchases}}}\right){\mbox{365 Days}}}
  

Cash Conversion Cycle

  
    
      
        
          Inventory Conversion Period + Receivables Conversion Period - Payables Conversion Period
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\mbox{Inventory Conversion Period + Receivables Conversion Period - Payables Conversion Period}}}
  


=== Debt ratios (leveraging ratios) ===
Debt ratios quantify the firm's ability to repay long-term debt. Debt ratios measure financial leverage.

Debt ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Total Liabilities
            Total Assets
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Total Liabilities}}{\mbox{Total Assets}}}}
  

Debt to equity ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Long-term Debt + Value of Leases
            Average Shareholders Equity
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Long-term Debt + Value of Leases}}{\mbox{Average Shareholders Equity}}}}
  

Long-term Debt to equity (LT Debt to Equity)

  
    
      
        
          
            Long-term Debt
            Average Shareholders Equity
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Long-term Debt}}{\mbox{Average Shareholders Equity}}}}
  

Times interest earned ratio (Interest Coverage Ratio)

  
    
      
        
          
            EBIT
            Annual Interest Expense
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{EBIT}}{\mbox{Annual Interest Expense}}}}
  
OR

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Income
            Annual Interest Expense
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Income}}{\mbox{Annual Interest Expense}}}}
  

Debt service coverage ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Operating Income
            Total Debt Service
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Operating Income}}{\mbox{Total Debt Service}}}}
  


=== Market ratios ===
Market ratios measure investor response to owning a company's stock and also the cost of issuing stock. These are concerned with the return on investment for shareholders, and with the relationship between return and the value of an investment in company's shares.

Earnings per share (EPS)

  
    
      
        
          
            Net Earnings
            Number of Shares
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Net Earnings}}{\mbox{Number of Shares}}}}
  

Payout ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Dividends
            Earnings
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Dividends}}{\mbox{Earnings}}}}
  
OR

  
    
      
        
          
            Dividends
            EPS
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Dividends}}{\mbox{EPS}}}}
  

Dividend cover (the inverse of Payout Ratio)

  
    
      
        
          
            Earnings per Share
            Dividend per Share
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Earnings per Share}}{\mbox{Dividend per Share}}}}
  

P/E ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Market Price per Share
            Diluted EPS
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Market Price per Share}}{\mbox{Diluted EPS}}}}
  

Dividend yield

  
    
      
        
          
            Dividend
            Current Market Price
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Dividend}}{\mbox{Current Market Price}}}}
  

Cash flow ratio or Price/cash flow ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Market Price per Share
            Present Value of Cash Flow per Share
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Market Price per Share}}{\mbox{Present Value of Cash Flow per Share}}}}
  

Price to book value ratio (P/B or PBV)

  
    
      
        
          
            Market Price per Share
            Balance Sheet Price per Share
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Market Price per Share}}{\mbox{Balance Sheet Price per Share}}}}
  

Price/sales ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Market Price per Share
            Gross Sales
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Market Price per Share}}{\mbox{Gross Sales}}}}
  

PEG ratio

  
    
      
        
          
            Price per Earnings
            Annual EPS Growth
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Price per Earnings}}{\mbox{Annual EPS Growth}}}}
  

Other Market Ratios

EV/EBITDA

  
    
      
        
          
            Enterprise Value
            EBITDA
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Enterprise Value}}{\mbox{EBITDA}}}}
  

EV/Sales

  
    
      
        
          
            Enterprise Value
            Net Sales
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mbox{Enterprise Value}}{\mbox{Net Sales}}}}
  

Cost/Income ratio

Sector-specific ratios

EV/capacity

EV/output


=== Capital budgeting ratios ===

In addition to assisting management and owners in diagnosing the financial health of their company, ratios can also help managers make decisions about investments or projects that the company is considering to take, such as acquisitions, or expansion.
Many formal methods are used in capital budgeting, including the techniques such as
Net present value
Profitability index
Internal rate of return
Modified internal rate of return
Equivalent annuity


== See also ==
List of financial performance measures
Greeks (finance)


== References ==


== External links ==
Stock Valuation MetricsA general manager is an executive who has overall responsibility for managing both the revenue and cost elements of a company's income statement, known as profit & loss (P&L) responsibility. A general manager usually oversees most or all of the firm's marketing and sales functions as well as the day-to-day operations of the business. Frequently, the general manager is responsible for effective planning, delegating, coordinating, staffing, organizing, and decision making to attain desirable profit making results for an organization (Sayles 1979).
In many cases, the general manager of a business is given a different formal title or titles. Most corporate managers holding the titles of chief executive officer (CEO) or president, for example, are the general managers of their respective businesses. More rarely, the chief financial officer (CFO), chief operating officer (COO), or chief marketing officer (CMO) will act as the general manager of the business. Depending on the company, individuals with the title managing director, regional vice president, country manager, product manager, branch manager, or segment manager may also have general management responsibilities. In large companies, many vice presidents will have the title of general manager when they have the full set of responsibility for the function in that particular area of the business and are often titled vice president and general manager.
In technology companies, general managers are often given to the product manager. In consumer products companies, general managers are often given the title brand manager or category manager. In professional services firms, the general manager may hold titles such as managing partner, senior partner, or managing director.


== Industry-specific usages ==


=== Hotels ===

In the hotel industry, the general manager is the head executive responsible for the overall operation of an individual hotel establishment including financial profitability. The general manager holds ultimate managerial authority over the hotel operation and usually reports directly to a regional vice president, corporate office, and/or hotel ownership/investors. Common duties of a general manager include but are not limited to hiring and management of an executive team consisting of individual department heads that oversee various hotel departments and functions, budgeting and financial management, creating and enforcing hotel business objectives and goals, sales management, marketing management, revenue management, project management, contract management, handling of emergencies and other major issues involving guests, employees, or the facility, public relations, labor relations, local government relations, maintaining business partnerships, and many additional duties. The extent of duties of an individual hotel general manager vary significantly depending on the size of the hotel and company organization, for example, general managers of smaller boutique-type hotels may be directly responsible for additional administrative duties such as accounting, human resources, payroll, purchasing, and other duties that would normally be handled by other subordinate managers or entire departments and divisions in a larger hotel operation.


=== Sports teams ===
In most professional sports, the general manager is the team executive responsible for acquiring the rights to player personnel, negotiating their contracts, and reassigning or dismissing players no longer desired on the team. The general manager may also have responsibility for hiring the head coach of the team.
For many years in U.S. professional sports, coaches often served as general managers for their teams as well, deciding which players would be kept on the team and which ones dismissed, and even negotiating the terms of their contracts in cooperation with the ownership of the team. In fact, many sports teams in the early years of U.S. professional sports were coached by the owner of the team, so in some cases the same individual served as owner, general manager and head coach.
As the amount of money involved in professional sports increased, many prominent players began to hire agents to negotiate contracts on their behalf. The intensified contract negotiations that resulted, as well to ensure all player contracts are in accordance with these caps, as well as consistent with the desires of the ownership and its ability to pay.
General managers are usually responsible for the selection of players in player drafts and work with the coaching staff and scouts to build a strong team. In sports with developmental or minor leagues, the general manager is usually the team executive with the overall responsibility for "sending down" and "calling up" players to and from these leagues, although the head coach may also have significant input into these decisions.
Some of the most successful sports general managers have been former players and coaches, while others have backgrounds in ownership and business management.
The term is not commonly used in Europe, especially in soccer, where the position of manager or coach is used instead to refer to the managing/coaching position. The position of director of football might be the most similar position on many European football clubs.


== See also ==
Business manager
Hotel management
Hospitality management studies
Sports management
General manager (American football)
General manager (baseball)
General manager (basketball)
General manager (ice hockey)
Managing director
Sports Illustrated Top 10 GMs/Executives of the Decade (in all sports) (2009)
Sporting News Executive of the Year (MLB)
NBA Executive of the Year Award


== External links ==
Sports General Manager Video Games


== References ==India, officially the Republic of India, is a country in South Asia. It is the seventh-largest country by area, the second-most populous country (with over 1.2 billion people), and the most populous democracy in the world. It is bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast. It shares land borders with Pakistan to the west; China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the northeast; and Myanmar (Burma) and Bangladesh to the east. In the Indian Ocean, India is in the vicinity of Sri Lanka and the Maldives. India's Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with Thailand and Indonesia. Its capital is New Delhi; other metropolises include Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad.
Home to the ancient Indus Valley Civilisation and a region of historic trade routes and vast empires, the Indian subcontinent was identified with its commercial and cultural wealth for much of its long history. Four religions, Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism originated in India, whereas Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam arrived in the first millennium CE, and they also played a part in shaping the region's diverse culture. Gradually annexed and brought under the administration of the British East India Company from the early 18th century and administered directly by the United Kingdom after the Indian Rebellion of 1857, it became an independent nation in 1947 after a struggle for independence that was marked by non-violent resistance led by Mahatma Gandhi.
In 2015, the Indian economy was the world's seventh largest by nominal gross domestic product (GDP) and third largest by purchasing power parity (PPP). Following market-based economic reforms in 1991, India became one of the fastest-growing major economies and is considered a newly industrialised country. However, it continues to face the challenges of poverty, corruption, malnutrition, and inadequate public healthcare. A nuclear weapons state and a regional power, it has the third largest standing army in the world and ranks sixth in military expenditure among nations. India is a federal constitutional republic governed under a parliamentary system and consists of 29 states and 7 union territories. It is a pluralistic, multilingual and multi-ethnic society and is also home to a diversity of wildlife in a variety of protected habitats.


== Etymology ==

The name India is derived from Indus, which originates from the Old Persian word Hindu. The latter term stems from the Sanskrit word Sindhu, which was the historical local appellation for the Indus River. The ancient Greeks referred to the Indians as Indoi (), which translates as "The people of the Indus".
The geographical term Bharat (Bhrat, pronounced [bart]), which is recognised by the Constitution of India as an official name for the country, is used by many Indian languages in its variations. It is a modernisation of the historical name Bharatavarsha, which traditionally referred to the Indian subcontinent and gained increasing currency from the mid-19th century as a native name for India. Scholars believe it to be named after the Vedic tribe of Bharatas in the second millennium B.C.E. It is also traditionally associated with the rule of the legendary emperor Bharata. Gaarjya (literally, people's State) is the Sanskrit/Hindi term for "republic" dating back to the ancient times.
Hindustan ([ndstan]) is a Persian name for India dating back to the 3rd century B.C.E. It was introduced into India by the Mughals and widely used since then. Its meaning varied, referring to a region that encompassed northern India and Pakistan or India in its entirety. Currently, the name may refer to either the northern part of India or the entire country.


== History ==


=== Ancient India ===
The earliest authenticated human remains in South Asia date to about 30,000 years ago. Nearly contemporaneous Mesolithic rock art sites have been found in many parts of the Indian subcontinent, including at the Bhimbetka rock shelters in Madhya Pradesh. Around 7000 BCE, the first known Neolithic settlements appeared on the subcontinent in Mehrgarh and other sites in western Pakistan. These gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilisation, the first urban culture in South Asia; it flourished during 25001900 BCE in Pakistan and western India. Centred around cities such as Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, Dholavira, and Kalibangan, and relying on varied forms of subsistence, the civilisation engaged robustly in crafts production and wide-ranging trade.

During the period 2000500 BCE, in terms of culture, many regions of the subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic to the Iron Age. The Vedas, the oldest scriptures of Hinduism, were composed during this period, and historians have analysed these to posit a Vedic culture in the Punjab region and the upper Gangetic Plain. Most historians also consider this period to have encompassed several waves of Indo-Aryan migration into the subcontinent. The caste system arose during this period, creating a hierarchy of priests, warriors, free peasants and traders, and lastly the indigenous peoples who were regarded as impure; and small tribal units gradually coalesced into monarchical, state-level polities. On the Deccan Plateau, archaeological evidence from this period suggests the existence of a chiefdom stage of political organisation. In southern India, a progression to sedentary life is indicated by the large number of megalithic monuments dating from this period, as well as by nearby traces of agriculture, irrigation tanks, and craft traditions.

In the late Vedic period, around the 6th century BCE, the small states and chiefdoms of the Ganges Plain and the north-western regions had consolidated into 16 major oligarchies and monarchies that were known as the mahajanapadas. The emerging urbanisation gave rise to non-Vedic religious movements, two of which became independent religions. Jainism came into prominence during the life of its exemplar, Mahavira. Buddhism, based on the teachings of Gautama Buddha attracted followers from all social classes excepting the middle class; chronicling the life of the Buddha was central to the beginnings of recorded history in India. In an age of increasing urban wealth, both religions held up renunciation as an ideal, and both established long-lasting monastic traditions. Politically, by the 3rd century BCE, the kingdom of Magadha had annexed or reduced other states to emerge as the Mauryan Empire. The empire was once thought to have controlled most of the subcontinent excepting the far south, but its core regions are now thought to have been separated by large autonomous areas. The Mauryan kings are known as much for their empire-building and determined management of public life as for Ashoka's renunciation of militarism and far-flung advocacy of the Buddhist dhamma.
The Sangam literature of the Tamil language reveals that, between 200 BCE and 200 CE, the southern peninsula was being ruled by the Cheras, the Cholas, and the Pandyas, dynasties that traded extensively with the Roman Empire and with West and South-East Asia. In North India, Hinduism asserted patriarchal control within the family, leading to increased subordination of women. By the 4th and 5th centuries, the Gupta Empire had created in the greater Ganges Plain a complex system of administration and taxation that became a model for later Indian kingdoms. Under the Guptas, a renewed Hinduism based on devotion rather than the management of ritual began to assert itself. The renewal was reflected in a flowering of sculpture and architecture, which found patrons among an urban elite. Classical Sanskrit literature flowered as well, and Indian science, astronomy, medicine, and mathematics made significant advances.


=== Medieval India ===

The Indian early medieval age, 600 CE to 1200 CE, is defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity. When Harsha of Kannauj, who ruled much of the Indo-Gangetic Plain from 606 to 647 CE, attempted to expand southwards, he was defeated by the Chalukya ruler of the Deccan. When his successor attempted to expand eastwards, he was defeated by the Pala king of Bengal. When the Chalukyas attempted to expand southwards, they were defeated by the Pallavas from farther south, who in turn were opposed by the Pandyas and the Cholas from still farther south. No ruler of this period was able to create an empire and consistently control lands much beyond his core region. During this time, pastoral peoples whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy were accommodated within caste society, as were new non-traditional ruling classes. The caste system consequently began to show regional differences.
In the 6th and 7th centuries, the first devotional hymns were created in the Tamil language. They were imitated all over India and led to both the resurgence of Hinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent. Indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised, drew citizens in great numbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well. Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as India underwent another urbanisation. By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effects were felt in South-East Asia, as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, and Java. Indian merchants, scholars, and sometimes armies were involved in this transmission; South-East Asians took the initiative as well, with many sojourning in Indian seminaries and translating Buddhist and Hindu texts into their languages.
After the 10th century, Muslim Central Asian nomadic clans, using swift-horse cavalry and raising vast armies united by ethnicity and religion, repeatedly overran South Asia's north-western plains, leading eventually to the establishment of the Islamic Delhi Sultanate in 1206. The sultanate was to control much of North India, and to make many forays into South India. Although at first disruptive for the Indian elites, the sultanate largely left its vast non-Muslim subject population to its own laws and customs. By repeatedly repulsing Mongol raiders in the 13th century, the sultanate saved India from the devastation visited on West and Central Asia, setting the scene for centuries of migration of fleeing soldiers, learned men, mystics, traders, artists, and artisans from that region into the subcontinent, thereby creating a syncretic Indo-Islamic culture in the north. The sultanate's raiding and weakening of the regional kingdoms of South India paved the way for the indigenous Vijayanagara Empire. Embracing a strong Shaivite tradition and building upon the military technology of the sultanate, the empire came to control much of peninsular India, and was to influence South Indian society for long afterwards.


=== Early modern India ===

In the early 16th century, northern India, being then under mainly Muslim rulers, fell again to the superior mobility and firepower of a new generation of Central Asian warriors. The resulting Mughal Empire did not stamp out the local societies it came to rule, but rather balanced and pacified them through new administrative practices and diverse and inclusive ruling elites, leading to more systematic, centralised, and uniform rule. Eschewing tribal bonds and Islamic identity, especially under Akbar, the Mughals united their far-flung realms through loyalty, expressed through a Persianised culture, to an emperor who had near-divine status. The Mughal state's economic policies, deriving most revenues from agriculture and mandating that taxes be paid in the well-regulated silver currency, caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets. The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India's economic expansion, resulting in greater patronage of painting, literary forms, textiles, and architecture. Newly coherent social groups in northern and western India, such as the Marathas, the Rajputs, and the Sikhs, gained military and governing ambitions during Mughal rule, which, through collaboration or adversity, gave them both recognition and military experience. Expanding commerce during Mughal rule gave rise to new Indian commercial and political elites along the coasts of southern and eastern India. As the empire disintegrated, many among these elites were able to seek and control their own affairs.
By the early 18th century, with the lines between commercial and political dominance being increasingly blurred, a number of European trading companies, including the English East India Company, had established coastal outposts. The East India Company's control of the seas, greater resources, and more advanced military training and technology led it to increasingly flex its military muscle and caused it to become attractive to a portion of the Indian elite; both these factors were crucial in allowing the company to gain control over the Bengal region by 1765 and sideline the other European companies. Its further access to the riches of Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annex or subdue most of India by the 1820s. India was then no longer exporting manufactured goods as it long had, but was instead supplying the British Empire with raw materials, and many historians consider this to be the onset of India's colonial period. By this time, with its economic power severely curtailed by the British parliament and itself effectively made an arm of British administration, the company began to more consciously enter non-economic arenas such as education, social reform, and culture.


=== Modern India ===

Historians consider India's modern age to have begun sometime between 1848 and 1885. The appointment in 1848 of Lord Dalhousie as Governor General of the East India Company set the stage for changes essential to a modern state. These included the consolidation and demarcation of sovereignty, the surveillance of the population, and the education of citizens (English Education Act 1835). Technological changesamong them, railways, canals, and the telegraphwere introduced not long after their introduction in Europe. However, disaffection with the company also grew during this time, and set off the Indian Rebellion of 1857. Fed by diverse resentments and perceptions, including invasive British-style social reforms, harsh land taxes, and summary treatment of some rich landowners and princes, the rebellion rocked many regions of northern and central India and shook the foundations of Company rule. Although the rebellion was suppressed by 1858, it led to the dissolution of the East India Company and to the direct administration of India by the British government. Proclaiming a unitary state and a gradual but limited British-style parliamentary system, the new rulers also protected princes and landed gentry as a feudal safeguard against future unrest. In the decades following, public life gradually emerged all over India, leading eventually to the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885.

The rush of technology and the commercialisation of agriculture in the second half of the 19th century was marked by economic setbacksmany small farmers became dependent on the whims of far-away markets. There was an increase in the number of large-scale famines, and, despite the risks of infrastructure development borne by Indian taxpayers, little industrial employment was generated for Indians. There were also salutary effects: commercial cropping, especially in the newly canalled Punjab, led to increased food production for internal consumption. The railway network provided critical famine relief, notably reduced the cost of moving goods, and helped nascent Indian-owned industry. After World War I, in which approximately one million Indians served, a new period began. It was marked by British reforms but also repressive legislations, by more strident Indian calls for self-rule, and by the beginnings of a nonviolent movement of non-co-operation, of which Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi would become the leader and enduring symbol. During the 1930s, slow legislative reform was enacted by the British; the Indian National Congress won victories in the resulting elections. The next decade was beset with crises: Indian participation in World War II, the Congress's final push for non-co-operation, and an upsurge of Muslim nationalism. All were capped by the advent of independence in 1947, but tempered by the partition of India into two states: India and Pakistan.
Vital to India's self-image as an independent nation was its constitution, completed in 1950, which put in place a secular and democratic republic. In the 60 years since, India has had a mixed record of successes and failures. It has remained a democracy with civil liberties, an active Supreme Court, and a largely independent press. Economic liberalisation, which was begun in the 1990s, has created a large urban middle class, transformed India into one of the world's fastest-growing economies, and increased its geopolitical clout. Indian movies, music, and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture. Yet, India is also shaped by seemingly unyielding poverty, both rural and urban; by religious and caste-related violence; by Maoist-inspired Naxalite insurgencies; and by separatism in Jammu and Kashmir and in Northeast India. It has unresolved territorial disputes with China and with Pakistan. The IndiaPakistan nuclear rivalry came to a head in 1998. India's sustained democratic freedoms are unique among the world's newer nations; however, in spite of its recent economic successes, freedom from want for its disadvantaged population remains a goal yet to be achieved.


== Geography ==

India comprises the bulk of the Indian subcontinent, lying atop the Indian tectonic plate, and part of the Indo-Australian Plate. India's defining geological processes began 75 million years ago when the Indian plate, then part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, began a north-eastward drift caused by seafloor spreading to its south-west, and later, south and south-east. Simultaneously, the vast Tethyn oceanic crust, to its northeast, began to subduct under the Eurasian plate. These dual processes, driven by convection in the Earth's mantle, both created the Indian Ocean and caused the Indian continental crust eventually to under-thrust Eurasia and to uplift the Himalayas. Immediately south of the emerging Himalayas, plate movement created a vast trough that rapidly filled with river-borne sediment and now constitutes the Indo-Gangetic Plain. Cut off from the plain by the ancient Aravalli Range lies the Thar Desert.
The original Indian plate survives as peninsular India, the oldest and geologically most stable part of India. It extends as far north as the Satpura and Vindhya ranges in central India. These parallel chains run from the Arabian Sea coast in Gujarat in the west to the coal-rich Chota Nagpur Plateau in Jharkhand in the east. To the south, the remaining peninsular landmass, the Deccan Plateau, is flanked on the west and east by coastal ranges known as the Western and Eastern Ghats; the plateau contains the country's oldest rock formations, some over one billion years old. Constituted in such fashion, India lies to the north of the equator between 6 44' and 35 30' north latitude and 68 7' and 97 25' east longitude.

India's coastline measures 7,517 kilometres (4,700 mi) in length; of this distance, 5,423 kilometres (3,400 mi) belong to peninsular India and 2,094 kilometres (1,300 mi) to the Andaman, Nicobar, and Lakshadweep island chains. According to the Indian naval hydrographic charts, the mainland coastline consists of the following: 43% sandy beaches; 11% rocky shores, including cliffs; and 46% mudflats or marshy shores.
Major Himalayan-origin rivers that substantially flow through India include the Ganges and the Brahmaputra, both of which drain into the Bay of Bengal. Important tributaries of the Ganges include the Yamuna and the Kosi; the latter's extremely low gradient often leads to severe floods and course changes. Major peninsular rivers, whose steeper gradients prevent their waters from flooding, include the Godavari, the Mahanadi, the Kaveri, and the Krishna, which also drain into the Bay of Bengal; and the Narmada and the Tapti, which drain into the Arabian Sea. Coastal features include the marshy Rann of Kutch of western India and the alluvial Sundarbans delta of eastern India; the latter is shared with Bangladesh. India has two archipelagos: the Lakshadweep, coral atolls off India's south-western coast; and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a volcanic chain in the Andaman Sea.
The Indian climate is strongly influenced by the Himalayas and the Thar Desert, both of which drive the economically and culturally pivotal summer and winter monsoons. The Himalayas prevent cold Central Asian katabatic winds from blowing in, keeping the bulk of the Indian subcontinent warmer than most locations at similar latitudes. The Thar Desert plays a crucial role in attracting the moisture-laden south-west summer monsoon winds that, between June and October, provide the majority of India's rainfall. Four major climatic groupings predominate in India: tropical wet, tropical dry, subtropical humid, and montane.


== Biodiversity ==

India lies within the Indomalaya ecozone and contains three biodiversity hotspots. One of 17 megadiverse countries, it hosts 8.6% of all mammalian, 13.7% of all avian, 7.9% of all reptilian, 6% of all amphibian, 12.2% of all piscine, and 6.0% of all flowering plant species. About 21.2% of the country's landmass is covered by forests (tree canopy density >10%), of which 12.2% comprises moderately or very dense forests (tree canopy density >40%). Endemism is high among plants, 33%, and among ecoregions such as the shola forests. Habitat ranges from the tropical rainforest of the Andaman Islands, Western Ghats, and North-East India to the coniferous forest of the Himalaya. Between these extremes lie the moist deciduous sal forest of eastern India; the dry deciduous teak forest of central and southern India; and the babul-dominated thorn forest of the central Deccan and western Gangetic plain. The medicinal neem, widely used in rural Indian herbal remedies, is a key Indian tree. The luxuriant pipal fig tree, shown on the seals of Mohenjo-daro, shaded Gautama Buddha as he sought enlightenment.
Many Indian species descend from taxa originating in Gondwana, from which the Indian plate separated more than 105 million years before present. Peninsular India's subsequent movement towards and collision with the Laurasian landmass set off a mass exchange of species. Epochal volcanism and climatic changes 20 million years ago forced a mass extinction. Mammals then entered India from Asia through two zoogeographical passes flanking the rising Himalaya. Thus, while 45.8% of reptiles and 55.8% of amphibians are endemic, only 12.6% of mammals and 4.5% of birds are. Among them are the Nilgiri leaf monkey and Beddome's toad of the Western Ghats. India contains 172 IUCN-designated threatened animal species, or 2.9% of endangered forms. These include the Asiatic lion, the Bengal tiger, the snow leopard and the Indian white-rumped vulture, which, by ingesting the carrion of diclofenac-laced cattle, nearly became extinct.
The pervasive and ecologically devastating human encroachment of recent decades has critically endangered Indian wildlife. In response the system of national parks and protected areas, first established in 1935, was substantially expanded. In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act and Project Tiger to safeguard crucial wilderness; the Forest Conservation Act was enacted in 1980 and amendments added in 1988. India hosts more than five hundred wildlife sanctuaries and thirteen biosphere reserves, four of which are part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves; twenty-five wetlands are registered under the Ramsar Convention.


== Politics ==

India is the world's most populous democracy. A parliamentary republic with a multi-party system, it has six recognised national parties, including the Indian National Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and more than 40 regional parties. The Congress is considered centre-left in Indian political culture, and the BJP right-wing. For most of the period between 1950when India first became a republicand the late 1980s, the Congress held a majority in the parliament. Since then, however, it has increasingly shared the political stage with the BJP, as well as with powerful regional parties which have often forced the creation of multi-party coalitions at the centre.
In the Republic of India's first three general elections, in 1951, 1957, and 1962, the Jawaharlal Nehru-led Congress won easy victories. On Nehru's death in 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri briefly became prime minister; he was succeeded, after his own unexpected death in 1966, by Indira Gandhi, who went on to lead the Congress to election victories in 1967 and 1971. Following public discontent with the state of emergency she declared in 1975, the Congress was voted out of power in 1977; the then-new Janata Party, which had opposed the emergency, was voted in. Its government lasted just over three years. Voted back into power in 1980, the Congress saw a change in leadership in 1984, when Indira Gandhi was assassinated; she was succeeded by her son Rajiv Gandhi, who won an easy victory in the general elections later that year. The Congress was voted out again in 1989 when a National Front coalition, led by the newly formed Janata Dal in alliance with the Left Front, won the elections; that government too proved relatively short-lived, lasting just under two years. Elections were held again in 1991; no party won an absolute majority. The Congress, as the largest single party, was able to form a minority government led by P. V. Narasimha Rao.

A two-year period of political turmoil followed the general election of 1996. Several short-lived alliances shared power at the centre. The BJP formed a government briefly in 1996; it was followed by two comparatively long-lasting United Front coalitions, which depended on external support. In 1998, the BJP was able to form a successful coalition, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA). Led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the NDA became the first non-Congress, coalition government to complete a five-year term. In the 2004 Indian general elections, again no party won an absolute majority, but the Congress emerged as the largest single party, forming another successful coalition: the United Progressive Alliance (UPA). It had the support of left-leaning parties and MPs who opposed the BJP. The UPA returned to power in the 2009 general election with increased numbers, and it no longer required external support from India's communist parties. That year, Manmohan Singh became the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru in 1957 and 1962 to be re-elected to a consecutive five-year term. In the 2014 general election, the BJP became the first political party since 1984 to win a majority and govern without the support of other parties. The Prime Minister of India is Narendra Modi, who was formerly Chief Minister of Gujarat.


=== Government ===

India is a federation with a parliamentary system governed under the Constitution of India, which serves as the country's supreme legal document. It is a constitutional republic and representative democracy, in which "majority rule is tempered by minority rights protected by law". Federalism in India defines the power distribution between the federal government and the states. The government abides by constitutional checks and balances. The Constitution of India, which came into effect on 26 January 1950, states in its preamble that India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic. India's form of government, traditionally described as "quasi-federal" with a strong centre and weak states, has grown increasingly federal since the late 1990s as a result of political, economic, and social changes.
The federal government comprises three branches:
Executive: The President of India is the head of state and is elected indirectly by a national electoral college for a five-year term. The Prime Minister of India is the head of government and exercises most executive power. Appointed by the president, the prime minister is by convention supported by the party or political alliance holding the majority of seats in the lower house of parliament. The executive branch of the Indian government consists of the president, the vice-president, and the Council of Ministersthe cabinet being its executive committeeheaded by the prime minister. Any minister holding a portfolio must be a member of one of the houses of parliament. In the Indian parliamentary system, the executive is subordinate to the legislature; the prime minister and his council are directly responsible to the lower house of the parliament.
Legislative: The legislature of India is the bicameral parliament. It operates under a Westminster-style parliamentary system and comprises the upper house called the Rajya Sabha ("Council of States") and the lower called the Lok Sabha ("House of the People"). The Rajya Sabha is a permanent body that has 245 members who serve in staggered six-year terms. Most are elected indirectly by the state and territorial legislatures in numbers proportional to their state's share of the national population. All but two of the Lok Sabha's 545 members are directly elected by popular vote; they represent individual constituencies via five-year terms. The remaining two members are nominated by the president from among the Anglo-Indian community, in case the president decides that they are not adequately represented.
Judicial: India has a unitary three-tier independent judiciary that comprises the Supreme Court, headed by the Chief Justice of India, 24 High Courts, and a large number of trial courts. The Supreme Court has original jurisdiction over cases involving fundamental rights and over disputes between states and the centre; it has appellate jurisdiction over the High Courts. It has the power both to declare the law and to strike down union or state laws which contravene the constitution, as well as to invalidate any government action it deems unconstitutional.


=== Subdivisions ===

India is a federation composed of 29 states and 7 union territories. All states, as well as the union territories of Puducherry and the National Capital Territory of Delhi, have elected legislatures and governments, both patterned on the Westminster model. The remaining five union territories are directly ruled by the centre through appointed administrators. In 1956, under the States Reorganisation Act, states were reorganised on a linguistic basis. Since then, their structure has remained largely unchanged. Each state or union territory is further divided into administrative districts. The districts in turn are further divided into tehsils and ultimately into villages.


== Foreign relations and military ==

Since its independence in 1947, India has maintained cordial relations with most nations. In the 1950s, it strongly supported decolonisation in Africa and Asia and played a lead role in the Non-Aligned Movement. In the late 1980s, the Indian military twice intervened abroad at the invitation of neighbouring countries: a peace-keeping operation in Sri Lanka between 1987 and 1990; and an armed intervention to prevent a 1988 coup d'tat attempt in Maldives. India has tense relations with neighbouring Pakistan; the two nations have gone to war four times: in 1947, 1965, 1971, and 1999. Three of these wars were fought over the disputed territory of Kashmir, while the fourth, the 1971 war, followed from India's support for the independence of Bangladesh. After waging the 1962 Sino-Indian War and the 1965 war with Pakistan, India pursued close military and economic ties with the Soviet Union; by the late 1960s, the Soviet Union was its largest arms supplier.
Aside from ongoing strategic relations with Russia, India has wide-ranging defence relations with Israel and France. In recent years, it has played key roles in the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and the World Trade Organisation. The nation has provided 100,000 military and police personnel to serve in 35 UN peacekeeping operations across four continents. It participates in the East Asia Summit, the G8+5, and other multilateral forums. India has close economic ties with South America, Asia, and Africa; it pursues a "Look East" policy that seeks to strengthen partnerships with the ASEAN nations, Japan, and South Korea that revolve around many issues, but especially those involving economic investment and regional security.

China's nuclear test of 1964, as well as its repeated threats to intervene in support of Pakistan in the 1965 war, convinced India to develop nuclear weapons. India conducted its first nuclear weapons test in 1974 and carried out further underground testing in 1998. Despite criticism and military sanctions, India has signed neither the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty nor the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, considering both to be flawed and discriminatory. India maintains a "no first use" nuclear policy and is developing a nuclear triad capability as a part of its "minimum credible deterrence" doctrine. It is developing a ballistic missile defence shield and, in collaboration with Russia, a fifth-generation fighter jet. Other indigenous military projects involve the design and implementation of Vikrant-class aircraft carriers and Arihant-class nuclear submarines.
Since the end of the Cold War, India has increased its economic, strategic, and military co-operation with the United States and the European Union. In 2008, a civilian nuclear agreement was signed between India and the United States. Although India possessed nuclear weapons at the time and was not party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, it received waivers from the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Suppliers Group, ending earlier restrictions on India's nuclear technology and commerce. As a consequence, India became the sixth de facto nuclear weapons state. India subsequently signed co-operation agreements involving civilian nuclear energy with Russia, France, the United Kingdom, and Canada.
The President of India is the supreme commander of the nation's armed forces; with 1.325 million active troops, they compose the world's third-largest military. It comprises the Indian Army, the Indian Navy, and the Indian Air Force; auxiliary organisations include the Strategic Forces Command and three paramilitary groups: the Assam Rifles, the Special Frontier Force, and the Indian Coast Guard. The official Indian defence budget for 2011 was US$36.03 billion, or 1.83% of GDP. For the fiscal year spanning 20122013, US$40.44 billion was budgeted. According to a 2008 SIPRI report, India's annual military expenditure in terms of purchasing power stood at US$72.7 billion. In 2011, the annual defence budget increased by 11.6%, although this does not include funds that reach the military through other branches of government. As of 2012, India is the world's largest arms importer; between 2007 and 2011, it accounted for 10% of funds spent on international arms purchases. Much of the military expenditure was focused on defence against Pakistan and countering growing Chinese influence in the Indian Ocean.


== Economy ==

According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Indian economy in 2015 was nominally worth US$2.183 trillion; it is the 7th-largest economy by market exchange rates, and is, at US$8.027 trillion, the third-largest by purchasing power parity, or PPP. With its average annual GDP growth rate of 5.8% over the past two decades, and reaching 6.1% during 201112, India is one of the world's fastest-growing economies. However, the country ranks 140th in the world in nominal GDP per capita and 129th in GDP per capita at PPP. Until 1991, all Indian governments followed protectionist policies that were influenced by socialist economics. Widespread state intervention and regulation largely walled the economy off from the outside world. An acute balance of payments crisis in 1991 forced the nation to liberalise its economy; since then it has slowly moved towards a free-market system by emphasising both foreign trade and direct investment inflows. India's recent economic model is largely capitalist. India has been a member of WTO since 1 January 1995.
The 486.6-million worker Indian labour force is the world's second-largest, as of 2011. The service sector makes up 55.6% of GDP, the industrial sector 26.3% and the agricultural sector 18.1%. India's foreign exchange remittances were US$70 billion in year 2014, the largest in the world, contributed to its economy by 25 million Indians working in foreign countries. Major agricultural products include rice, wheat, oilseed, cotton, jute, tea, sugarcane, and potatoes. Major industries include textiles, telecommunications, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, food processing, steel, transport equipment, cement, mining, petroleum, machinery, and software. In 2006, the share of external trade in India's GDP stood at 24%, up from 6% in 1985. In 2008, India's share of world trade was 1.68%; In 2011, India was the world's tenth-largest importer and the nineteenth-largest exporter. Major exports include petroleum products, textile goods, jewellery, software, engineering goods, chemicals, and leather manufactures. Major imports include crude oil, machinery, gems, fertiliser, and chemicals. Between 2001 and 2011, the contribution of petrochemical and engineering goods to total exports grew from 14% to 42%. India was the second largest textile exporter after China in the world in calendar year 2013.
Averaging an economic growth rate of 7.5% for several years prior to 2007, India has more than doubled its hourly wage rates during the first decade of the 21st century. Some 431 million Indians have left poverty since 1985; India's middle classes are projected to number around 580 million by 2030. Though ranking 51st in global competitiveness, India ranks 17th in financial market sophistication, 24th in the banking sector, 44th in business sophistication, and 39th in innovation, ahead of several advanced economies, as of 2010. With 7 of the world's top 15 information technology outsourcing companies based in India, the country is viewed as the second-most favourable outsourcing destination after the United States, as of 2009. India's consumer market, the world's eleventh-largest, is expected to become fifth-largest by 2030.
Driven by growth, India's nominal GDP per capita has steadily increased from US$329 in 1991, when economic liberalisation began, to US$1,265 in 2010, and is estimated to increase to US$2,110 by 2016; however, it has remained lower than those of other Asian developing countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, and is expected to remain so in the near future. However, it is higher than Pakistan, Nepal, Afghanistan, Bangladesh and others.
According to a 2011 PricewaterhouseCoopers report, India's GDP at purchasing power parity could overtake that of the United States by 2045. During the next four decades, Indian GDP is expected to grow at an annualised average of 8%, making it potentially the world's fastest-growing major economy until 2050. The report highlights key growth factors: a young and rapidly growing working-age population; growth in the manufacturing sector because of rising education and engineering skill levels; and sustained growth of the consumer market driven by a rapidly growing middle class. The World Bank cautions that, for India to achieve its economic potential, it must continue to focus on public sector reform, transport infrastructure, agricultural and rural development, removal of labour regulations, education, energy security, and public health and nutrition.
In 2016, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) released a list of the Top 10 cheapest cities in the world, based on the cost of 160 products and services, of which four were in India: Bangalore (2nd), Mumbai (3rd), Chennai (6th) and New Delhi (8th).


=== Sectors ===
India's telecommunication industry, the world's fastest-growing, added 227 million subscribers during the period 201011, and after the first quarter of 2013, India surpassed Japan to become the third largest smartphone market in the world after China and the US.

The Indian automotive industry, the world's second fastest growing, increased domestic sales by 26% during 200910, and exports by 36% during 200809. India's capacity to generate electrical power is 250 gigawatts, of which 8% is renewable. At the end of 2011, the Indian IT industry employed 2.8 million professionals, generated revenues close to US$100 billion equalling 7.5% of Indian GDP and contributed 26% of India's merchandise exports.
The pharmaceutical industry in India is among the significant emerging markets for global pharma industry. The Indian pharmaceutical market is expected to reach $48.5 billion by 2020. India's R & D spending constitutes 60% of the biopharmaceutical industry. India is among the top 12 biotech destinations of the world. The Indian biotech industry grew by 15.1% in 201213, increasing its revenues from 204.4 Billion INR (Indian Rupees) to 235.24 Billion INR (3.94 B US$  exchange rate June 2013: 1 US$ approx. 60 INR). Although hardly 2% of Indians pay income taxes.


=== Poverty ===

Despite impressive economic growth during recent decades, India continues to face socio-economic challenges. India contains the largest concentration of people living below the World Bank's international poverty line of US$1.25 per day, the proportion having decreased from 60% in 1981 to 42% in 2005, and 25% in 2011. 30.7% of India's children under the age of five are underweight. According to a Food and Agriculture Organization report in 2015, 15% of Indian population is undernourished. The Mid-Day Meal Scheme attempts to lower these rates. Since 1991, economic inequality between India's states has consistently grown: the per-capita net state domestic product of the richest states in 2007 was 3.2 times that of the poorest. Corruption in India is perceived to have increased significantly, with one report estimating the illegal capital flows since independence to be US$462 billion.
India has the highest number of people living in conditions of slavery, 18 million, most of whom are in bonded labour. India has the largest number of child labourers under the age of 14 in the world with an estimated 12.6 million children engaged in hazardous occupations.


== Demographics ==

With 1,210,193,422 residents reported in the 2011 provisional census report, India is the world's second-most populous country. Its population grew by 17.64% during 20012011, compared to 21.54% growth in the previous decade (19912001). The human sex ratio, according to the 2011 census, is 940 females per 1,000 males. The median age was 24.9 in the 2001 census. The first post-colonial census, conducted in 1951, counted 361.1 million people. Medical advances made in the last 50 years as well as increased agricultural productivity brought about by the "Green Revolution" have caused India's population to grow rapidly. India continues to face several public health-related challenges.
Life expectancy in India is at 68 years with life expectancy for women being 69.6 years and for men being 67.3. There are around 50 physicians per 100,000 Indians. The number of Indians living in urban areas has grown by 31.2% between 1991 and 2001. Yet, in 2001, over 70% lived in rural areas. The level of urbanisation increased from 27.81% in 2001 Census to 31.16% in 2011 Census. The slowing down of the overall growth rate of population was due to the sharp decline in the growth rate in rural areas since 1991. According to the 2011 census, there are 53 million-plus urban agglomerations in India; among them Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad, in decreasing order by population. The literacy rate in 2011 was 74.04%: 65.46% among females and 82.14% among males. The rural urban literacy gap which was 21.2 percentage points in 2001, dropped to 16.1 percentage points in 2011. The improvement in literacy rate in rural area is two times that in urban areas. Kerala is the most literate state with 93.91% literacy; while Bihar the least with 63.82%.
India is home to two major language families: Indo-Aryan (spoken by about 74% of the population) and Dravidian (24%). Other languages spoken in India come from the Austroasiatic and Sino-Tibetan language families. India has no national language. Hindi, with the largest number of speakers, is the official language of the government. English is used extensively in business and administration and has the status of a "subsidiary official language"; it is important in education, especially as a medium of higher education. Each state and union territory has one or more official languages, and the constitution recognises in particular 22 "scheduled languages". The Constitution of India recognises 212 scheduled tribal groups which together constitute about 7.5% of the country's population. The 2011 census reported that Hinduism (79.8% of the population) is the largest religion in India, followed by Islam (14.23%). Other religions or none (5.97% of the population) include Christianity (2.30%), Sikhism (1.72%), Buddhism (0.70%), Jainism, Judaism, Zoroastrianism, and the Bah' Faith. India has the world's largest Hindu, Sikh, Jain, Zoroastrian, and Bah' populations, and has the third-largest Muslim population and the largest Muslim population for a non-Muslim majority country.


== Culture ==

Indian cultural history spans more than 4,500 years. During the Vedic period (c. 1700  500 BCE), the foundations of Hindu philosophy, mythology, theology and literature were laid, and many beliefs and practices which still exist today, such as dhrma, krma, yga, and moka, were established. India is notable for its religious diversity, with Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Islam, Christianity, and Jainism among the nation's major religions. The predominant religion, Hinduism, has been shaped by various historical schools of thought, including those of the Upanishads, the Yoga Sutras, the Bhakti movement, and by Buddhist philosophy.


=== Art and architecture ===

Much of Indian architecture, including the Taj Mahal, other works of Mughal architecture, and South Indian architecture, blends ancient local traditions with imported styles. Vernacular architecture is also highly regional in it flavours. Vastu shastra, literally "science of construction" or "architecture" and ascribed to Mamuni Mayan, explores how the laws of nature affect human dwellings; it employs precise geometry and directional alignments to reflect perceived cosmic constructs. As applied in Hindu temple architecture, it is influenced by the Shilpa Shastras, a series of foundational texts whose basic mythological form is the Vastu-Purusha mandala, a square that embodied the "absolute". The Taj Mahal, built in Agra between 1631 and 1648 by orders of Emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his wife, has been described in the UNESCO World Heritage List as "the jewel of Muslim art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world's heritage". Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture, developed by the British in the late 19th century, drew on Indo-Islamic architecture.


=== Literature ===

The earliest literary writings in India, composed between 1700 BCE and 1200 CE, were in the Sanskrit language. Prominent works of this Sanskrit literature include epics such as the Mahbhrata and the Ramayana, the dramas of Klidsa such as the Abhijnakuntalam (The Recognition of akuntal), and poetry such as the Mahkvya. Kamasutra, the famous book about sexual intercourse also originated in India. Developed between 600 BCE and 300 CE in South India, the Sangam literature, consisting of 2,381 poems, is regarded as a predecessor of Tamil literature. From the 14th to the 18th centuries, India's literary traditions went through a period of drastic change because of the emergence of devotional poets such as Kabr, Tulsds, and Guru Nnak. This period was characterised by a varied and wide spectrum of thought and expression; as a consequence, medieval Indian literary works differed significantly from classical traditions. In the 19th century, Indian writers took a new interest in social questions and psychological descriptions. In the 20th century, Indian literature was influenced by the works of Bengali poet and novelist Rabindranath Tagore, who was a recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature.


=== Performing arts ===

Indian music ranges over various traditions and regional styles. Classical music encompasses two genres and their various folk offshoots: the northern Hindustani and southern Carnatic schools. Regionalised popular forms include filmi and folk music; the syncretic tradition of the bauls is a well-known form of the latter. Indian dance also features diverse folk and classical forms. Among the better-known folk dances are the bhangra of Punjab, the bihu of Assam, the chhau of Odisha, West Bengal and Jharkhand, garba and dandiya of Gujarat, ghoomar of Rajasthan, and the lavani of Maharashtra. Eight dance forms, many with narrative forms and mythological elements, have been accorded classical dance status by India's National Academy of Music, Dance, and Drama. These are: bharatanatyam of the state of Tamil Nadu, kathak of Uttar Pradesh, kathakali and mohiniyattam of Kerala, kuchipudi of Andhra Pradesh, manipuri of Manipur, odissi of Odisha, and the sattriya of Assam. Theatre in India melds music, dance, and improvised or written dialogue. Often based on Hindu mythology, but also borrowing from medieval romances or social and political events, Indian theatre includes the bhavai of Gujarat, the jatra of West Bengal, the nautanki and ramlila of North India, tamasha of Maharashtra, burrakatha of Andhra Pradesh, terukkuttu of Tamil Nadu, and the yakshagana of Karnataka.


=== Motion pictures, television ===

The Indian film industry produces the world's most-watched cinema. Established regional cinematic traditions exist in the Assamese, Bengali, Bhojpuri, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Punjabi, Gujarati, Marathi, Odia, Tamil, and Telugu languages. South Indian cinema attracts 45% of national film revenue.
Television broadcasting began in India in 1959 as a state-run medium of communication, and had slow expansion for more than two decades. The state monopoly on television broadcast ended in the 1990s and, since then, satellite channels have increasingly shaped popular culture of Indian society. Today, television is the most penetrative media in India; industry estimates indicate that as of 2012 there are over 554 million TV consumers, 462 million with satellite and/or cable connections, compared to other forms of mass media such as press (350 million), radio (156 million) or internet (37 million).


=== Cuisine ===

Indian cuisine encompasses a wide variety of regional and traditional cuisines, often depending on a particular state (such as Maharashtrian cuisine). Staple foods of Indian cuisine include pearl millet (bjra), rice, whole-wheat flour (aa), and a variety of lentils, such as masoor (most often red lentils), toor (pigeon peas), urad (black gram), and mong (mung beans). Lentils may be used whole, dehuskedfor example, dhuli moong or dhuli urador split. Split lentils, or dal, are used extensively. The spice trade between India and Europe is often cited by historians as the primary catalyst for Europe's Age of Discovery.


=== Society ===

Traditional Indian society is sometimes defined by social hierarchy. The Indian caste system embodies much of the social stratification and many of the social restrictions found in the Indian subcontinent. Social classes are defined by thousands of endogamous hereditary groups, often termed as jtis, or "castes". India declared untouchability to be illegal in 1947 and has since enacted other anti-discriminatory laws and social welfare initiatives. At the workplace in urban India and in international or leading Indian companies, the caste related identification has pretty much lost its importance.
Family values are important in the Indian tradition, and multi-generational patriarchal joint families have been the norm in India, though nuclear families are becoming common in urban areas. An overwhelming majority of Indians, with their consent, have their marriages arranged by their parents or other elders in the family. Marriage is thought to be for life, and the divorce rate is extremely low. As of 2001, just 1.6 percent of Indian women were divorced but this figure was rising due to their education and economic independence. Child marriages are common, especially in rural areas; many women wed before reaching 18, which is their legal marriageable age. Female infanticide and female foeticide in the country have caused a discrepancy in the sex ratio, as of 2005 it was estimated that there were 50 million more males than females in the nation. However a report from 2011 has shown improvement in the gender ratio. The payment of dowry, although illegal, remains widespread across class lines. Deaths resulting from dowry, mostly from bride burning, are on the rise.
Many Indian festivals are religious in origin. The best known include Diwali, Ganesh Chaturthi, Thai Pongal, Holi, Durga Puja, Eid ul-Fitr, Bakr-Id, Christmas, and Vaisakhi. India has three national holidays which are observed in all states and union territories  Republic Day, Independence Day and Gandhi Jayanti. Other sets of holidays, varying between nine and twelve, are officially observed in individual states.


=== Clothing ===

Cotton was domesticated in India by 4000 BCE. Traditional Indian dress varies in colour and style across regions and depends on various factors, including climate and faith. Popular styles of dress include draped garments such as the sari for women and the dhoti or lungi for men. Stitched clothes, such as the shalwar kameez for women and kurtapyjama combinations or European-style trousers and shirts for men, are also popular. Use of delicate jewellery, modelled on real flowers worn in ancient India, is part of a tradition dating back some 5,000 years; gemstones are also worn in India as talismans.


=== Sports ===

In India, several traditional indigenous sports remain fairly popular, such as kabaddi, kho kho, pehlwani and gilli-danda. Some of the earliest forms of Asian martial arts, such as kalarippayattu, musti yuddha, silambam, and marma adi, originated in India. Chess, commonly held to have originated in India as chaturaga, is regaining widespread popularity with the rise in the number of Indian grandmasters. Pachisi, from which parcheesi derives, was played on a giant marble court by Akbar.
The improved results garnered by the Indian Davis Cup team and other Indian tennis players in the early 2010s have made tennis increasingly popular in the country. India has a comparatively strong presence in shooting sports, and has won several medals at the Olympics, the World Shooting Championships, and the Commonwealth Games. Other sports in which Indians have succeeded internationally include badminton (Saina Nehwal and P V Sindhu are two of the top ranked female badminton players in the world), boxing, and wrestling. Football is popular in West Bengal, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and the north-eastern states. India is scheduled to host the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup.
Field hockey in India is administered by Hockey India. The Indian national hockey team won the 1975 Hockey World Cup and have, as of 2016, taken eight gold, one silver, and two bronze Olympic medals, making it the sport's most successful team in the Olympics.
India has also played a major role in popularising cricket. Thus, cricket is, by far, the most popular sport in India. The Indian national cricket team won the 1983 and 2011 Cricket World Cup events, the 2007 ICC World Twenty20, shared the 2002 ICC Champions Trophy with Sri Lanka, and won 2013 ICC Champions Trophy. Cricket in India is administered by the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI); the Ranji Trophy, the Duleep Trophy, the Deodhar Trophy, the Irani Trophy, and the NKP Salve Challenger Trophy are domestic competitions. The BCCI is also responsible for conducting an annual Twenty20 competition known as the Indian Premier League.
India has hosted or co-hosted several international sporting events: the 1951 and 1982 Asian Games; the 1987, 1996, and 2011 Cricket World Cup tournaments; the 2003 Afro-Asian Games; the 2006 ICC Champions Trophy; the 2010 Hockey World Cup; and the 2010 Commonwealth Games. Major international sporting events held annually in India include the Chennai Open, the Mumbai Marathon, the Delhi Half Marathon, and the Indian Masters. The first Formula 1 Indian Grand Prix featured in late 2011 but has been discontinued from the F1 season calendar since 2014.
India has traditionally been the dominant country at the South Asian Games. An example of this dominance is the basketball competition where Team India won three out of four tournaments to date.
The Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna and the Arjuna Award are the highest forms of government recognition for athletic achievement; the Dronacharya Award is awarded for excellence in coaching.


== See also ==

Outline of India
Index of India-related articles


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Overview

Etymology

History

Geography

Biodiversity

Politics

Foreign relations and military

Economy

Demographics

Culture


== External links ==
Government
Official website of Government of India
Government of India Web Directory
General information
"India". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
India at DMOZ
India from UCB Libraries GovPubs
India from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of India
 Geographic data related to India at OpenStreetMap
Key Development Forecasts for India from International FuturesA sale is the exchange of a commodity or money as the price of a good or a service. Sales (plural only) is activity related to selling or the amount of goods or services sold in a given time period.
The seller or the provider of the goods or services completes a sale in response to an acquisition, appropriation, requisition or a direct interaction with the buyer at the point of sale. There is a passing of title (property or ownership) of the item, and the settlement of a price, in which agreement is reached on a price for which transfer of ownership of the item will occur. The seller, not the purchaser generally executes the sale and it may be completed prior to the obligation of payment. In the case of indirect interaction, a person who sells goods or service on behalf of the owner is known as salesman or saleswoman.
In common law countries, sales are governed generally by the common law and commercial codes. In the United States, the laws governing sales of goods are somewhat uniform to the extent that most jurisdictions have adopted Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code, albeit with some non-uniform variations.


== Definition of sales ==
A person or organization expressing an interest in acquiring the offered item of value is referred to as a potential buyer, prospective customer or prospect. Buying and selling are understood to be two sides of the same "coin" or transaction. Both seller and buyer engage in a process of negotiation to consummate the exchange of values. The exchange, or selling, process has implied rules and identifiable stages. It is implied that the selling process will proceed fairly and ethically so that the parties end up nearly equally rewarded. The stages of selling, and buying, involve getting acquainted, assessing each partys need for the others item of value, and determining if the values to be exchanged are equivalent or nearly so, or, in buyer's terms, "worth the price. Sometimes, sellers have to use their own experiences when selling products with appropriate discounts.
From a management viewpoint it is thought of as a part of marketing, although the skills required are different. Sales often forms a separate grouping in a corporate structure, employing separate specialist operatives known as salespersons (singular: salesperson). Selling is considered by many to be a sort of persuading "art". Contrary to popular belief, the methodological approach of selling refers to a systematic process of repetitive and measurable milestones, by which a salesman relates his or her offering of a product or service in return enabling the buyer to achieve their goal in an economic way. While the sales process refers to a systematic process of repetitive and measurable milestones, the definition of the selling is somewhat ambiguous due to the close nature of advertising, promotion, public relations, and direct marketing.
Selling is the profession-wide term, much like marketing defines a profession. Recently, attempts have been made to clearly understand who is in the sales profession, and who is not. There are many articles looking at marketing, advertising, promotions, and even public relations as ways to create a unique transaction.
Two common terms used to describe a salesperson are "Farmer" and "Hunter". The reality is that most professional sales people have a little of both. A hunter is often associated with aggressive personalities who use aggressive sales technique. In terms of sales methodology a hunter refers to a person whose focus is on bringing in and closing deals. This process is called sales capturing. An example is a commodity sale such as a long distance sales person, shoe sales person and to a degree a car sales person. Their job is to find and convert buyers. A sales farmer is someone who creates sales demand by activities that directly influence and alter the buying process.
Many believe that the focus of selling is on the human agents involved in the exchange between buyer and seller. Effective selling also requires a systems approach, at minimum involving roles that sell, enable selling, and develop sales capabilities. Selling also involves salespeople who possess a specific set of sales skills and the knowledge required to facilitate the exchange of value between buyers and sellers that is unique from marketing, advertising, etc.
Within these three tenets, the following definition of professional selling is offered by the American Society for Training and Development (ASTD):
Team selling is one way to influence sales. Team selling is a group of people representing the sales department and other functional areas in the firm, such as finance, production, and research and development. (Spiro) Team selling came about in the 1990s through total quality management (TQM). TQM occurs when companies work to improve their customer satisfaction by constantly improving all of their operations.


=== The relationships between sales and marketing ===
Marketing and sales differ greatly, but generally have the same goal. Selling is the final stage in marketing, which also includes pricing, promotion, place and product (the 4 P's). A marketing department in an organization has the goals of increasing the desirability and value to the customer and increasing the number and engagement of interactions between potential customers and the organization. Achieving this goal may involve the sales team using promotional techniques such as advertising, sales promotion, publicity, and public relations, creating new sales channels, or creating new products (new product development), among other things. It can also include bringing the potential customer to visit the organization's website(s) for more information, or to contact the organization for more information, or to interact with the organization via social media such as Twitter, Facebook and blogs. Social values also play a major role in consumer decision processes.
The field of sales process engineering views "sales" as the output of a larger system, not just as the output of one department. The larger system includes many functional areas within an organization. From this perspective, "sales" and "marketing" (among others, such as "customer service") label for a number of processes whose inputs and outputs supply one another to varying degrees. In this context, improving an "output" (such as sales) involves studying and improving the broader sales process, as in any system, since the component functional areas interact and are interdependent.
Many large corporations structure their marketing departments so they are directly integrated with all lines of business. They create multiple teams with a singular focus and the managers of these teams must coordinate efforts in order to drive profits and business success. For example, an "inbound" focused campaign seeks to drive more customers "through the door", giving the sales department a better chance of selling their product to the consumer. A good marketing program would address any potential downsides as well.
The sales department would aim to improve the interaction between the customer and the sales facility or mechanism (example, web site) and/or salesperson. Sales management would break down the selling process and then increase the effectiveness of the discrete processes as well as the interaction between processes. For example, in many out-bound sales environments, the typical process includes out-bound calling, the sales pitch, handling objections, opportunity identification, and the close. Each step of the process has sales-related issues, skills, and training needs, as well as marketing solutions to improve each discrete step, as well as the whole process.
One further common complication of marketing involves the inability to measure results for a great deal of marketing initiatives. In essence, many marketing and advertising executives often lose sight of the objective of sales/revenue/profit, as they focus on establishing a creative/innovative program, without concern for the top or bottom lines - a fundamental pitfall of marketing for marketing's sake.
Many companies find it challenging to get marketing and sales on the same page. The two departments, although different in nature, handle very similar concepts and have to work together for sales to be successful. Building a good relationship between the two that encourages communication can be the key to success - even in a down economy.


=== Industrial marketing ===
The idea that marketing can potentially eliminate the need for sales people depends entirely on context. For example, this may be possible in some B2C situations; however, for many B2B transactions (for example, those involving industrial organizations) this is mostly impossible. Another dimension is the value of the goods being sold. Fast-moving consumer-goods (FMCG) require no sales people at the point of sale to get them to jump off the supermarket shelf and into the customer's trolley. However, the purchase of large mining equipment worth millions of dollars will require a sales person to manage the sales process - particularly in the face of competitors. Small and medium businesses selling such large ticket items to a geographically-disperse client base use manufacturers' representatives to provide these highly personal service while avoiding the large expense of a captive sales force.


=== Sales and marketing alignment and integration ===
Another area of discussion involves the need for alignment and integration between corporate sales and marketing functions. According to a report from the Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) Council, only 40 percent of companies have formal programs, systems or processes in place to align and integrate the two critical functions.
Traditionally, these two functions, as referenced above, have operated separately, left in siloed areas of tactical responsibility. Glen Petersen's book The Profit Maximization Paradox sees the changes in the competitive landscape between the 1950s and the time of writing as so dramatic that the complexity of choice, price and opportunities for the customer forced this seemingly simple and integrated relationship between sales and marketing to change forever. Petersen goes on to highlight that salespeople spend approximately 40 percent of their time preparing customer-facing deliverables while leveraging less than 50 percent of the materials created by marketing, adding to perceptions that marketing is out of touch with the customer and that sales is resistant to messaging and strategy.


== Sales methods ==


=== List of sales methods ===
A sale can take place through:
Direct sales, involving person to person contact
Channel sales, an indirect sales model, which differs from direct sales. Channel selling is a way for ("B2B") sellers to reach the ("B2B") and ("B2C") markets through distributors, re-sellers or value added re-sellers VARS.
Pro forma sales
Agency-based
Sales agents (for example in real estate or in manufacturing)
Sales outsourcing through direct branded representation
Transaction sales
Consultative sales
Complex sales
Consignment
Telemarketing or telesales
Retail or consumer

Traveling salesman
Door-to-door methods
hawking

Request for proposal  An invitation for suppliers, through a bidding process, to submit a proposal on a specific product or service. An RFP usually represents part of a complex sales process, also known as "enterprise sales".
Business-to-business  Business-to-business ("B2B") sales are likely to be larger in terms of volume, economic value and complexity than business-to-consumer ("B2C") sales. Because of this complexity, there is a need to manage the relationships between the buying and selling organisations, for example using Peter Cheverton's relationship models and the stakeholder map by Anderson, Bryson and Crosby
Electronic
Web  Business-to-business ("B2B") and business-to-consumer ("B2C")
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)  A set of standard for structuring information to be electronically exchanged between and within businesses

Indirect, human-mediated but with indirect contact
Mail-order
vending machine

Sales Techniques:
Selling technique
Consultative selling
Sales enablement
Solution selling
Conceptual selling
Strategic selling
Transactional selling
Sales Negotiation
Reverse Selling
Upselling
Cross-selling
Paint-the-Picture
take away
Sales Habits
Relationship Selling
Sales outsourcing
Cold calling
Guaranteed sale
Needs-based selling
Professional Selling Skills
Persuasive selling
Hard Selling
Price based selling
Target account selling
Sandler Selling System
Challenger Sales
Action Selling
Auctions
Social Selling
Personal selling


=== Sales agents ===
Agents in the sales process can represent either of two parties in the sales process; for example:
Sales broker, seller agency, seller agent, seller representative: This is a traditional role where the salesman represents a person or company on the selling end of a deal.
Buyers broker or Buyer brokerage: This is where the salesman represents the consumer making the purchase. This is most often applied in large transactions.
Disclosed dual agent:This is where the salesman represents both parties in the sale and acts as a mediator for the transaction. The role of the salesman here is to oversee that both parties receive an honest and fair deal, and is responsible to both.
Transaction broker: This is where the salesperson represents neither party but handles the transaction only. The seller owes no responsibility to either party getting a fair or honest deal, just that all of the papers are handled properly.
Sales outsourcing involves direct branded representation where the sales representatives are recruited, hired, and managed by an external entity but hold quotas, represent themselves as the brand of the client, and report all activities (through their own sales management channels) back to the client. It is akin to a virtual extension of a sales force (see sales outsourcing).
Sales managers aim to implement various sales strategies and management techniques in order to facilitate improved profits and increased sales volume. They are also responsible for coordinating the sales and marketing department as well as oversight concerning the fair and honest execution of the sales process by their agents.
Salesperson: The primary function of professional salespeople is to generate and close business resulting in revenue. The sales person will accomplish their primary function through a variety of means including phone calls, email, social media, networking, and cold calling. The primary objective of the successful salesperson is to find the consumers to sell to. Sales is often referred to as a "numbers game" because a general law of averages and pattern of successful closing of business will emerge through heightened sales activity. These activities include but are not limited to: locating prospects, fostering relationships with prospects, building trust with future clients, identifying and filling needs of consumers, and therefore turning prospective customers into actual ones. Many tools are used by successful salespeople, the most important of which is questioning which can be defined as a series of questions and resulting answers allowing the salesperson to understand a customer's goals and requirements relevant to the product. The creation of value or perceived value is the result of taking the information gathered, analyzing the goals and needs of the prospective customer and leveraging the products and/or services the salesperson's firm represents or sells in a way that most effectively achieves the prospective clients goals and/or suits their needs. Effective salespeople will package their offering and present their proposed solution in a way that leads the prospective customer to the conclusion that they acquire the solution, resulting in revenue and profit for the salesperson and the organization they represent.
Internet Sales Professionals: These people are primarily responsible for ensuring immediate response to the leads generated via social media, website or email campaigns.


=== Inside sales vs. Outside sales ===
Since the advent of the telephone, a distinction has been made between "inside sales" and "outside sales" although it is generally agreed that those terms have no hard-and-fast definition. In the United States, the Fair Labor Standards Act defines outside sales representatives as "employees [who] sell their employer's products, services, or facilities to customers away from their employer's place(s) of business, in general, either at the customer's place of business or by selling door-to-door at the customer's home" while defining those who work "from the employer's location" as inside sales. Inside sales generally involves attempting to close business primarily over the phone via telemarketing, while outside sales (or "field" sales) will usually involve initial phone work to book sales calls at the potential buyer's location to attempt to close the deal in person. Some companies have an inside sales department that works with outside representatives and book their appointments for them. Inside sales sometimes refers to upselling to existing customers.


== See also ==
Buzzword
Choice architecture
Demand chain
Financial transaction
Sales (accounting)
Sales effectiveness
Sales incentive plan
Sales contest
Sales territory
Sales variance
Trade
Vendor


== References ==


== External links ==For other forms of development, see Development (disambiguation).

International development or global development is a wide concept concerning the level of development on an international scale. It is the basis for international classifications such as developed country, developing country and least developed country. There are, however, many schools of thought and conventions regarding which are the exact features constituting development of a country.
Historically it has been largely synonymous with economic development. Recently it is also often used in a holistic and multi-disciplinary context of human development as well as other concepts like competitiveness, quality of life or subjective well-being.
International development is different from simple development in that it is specifically composed of institutions and policies that arose after World War II. These institutions focus on alleviating poverty and improving living conditions in previously colonised and other poor countries.


== History ==
Although international relations and international trade have existed for many hundreds of years, it is only in the past century that international development theory emerged as a separate body of ideas. More specifically, it has been suggested that 'the theory and practice of development is inherently technocratic, and remains rooted in the high modernist period of political thought that existed in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War'. Throughout the 20th century, before the concept of international development became a common word, four aspects were used to describe the idea:
political and economic liberalism, and the significance of "free markets"
social evolution in extremely hierarchized environment
Marxist critiques of class and imperialism
anti-colonial take on cultural differences and national self-determination


=== Post World War II ===
The second half of the 20th century has been called the 'era of development'. The origins of this era have been attributed to:
the need for reconstruction in the immediate aftermath of World War II;
the evolution of colonialism or "colonization" into globalization and the establishment of new free trade policies between so-called 'developed' and 'underdeveloped' nations.
the start of the Cold War and the desire of the United States and its allies to prevent the Third World from drifting towards communism.
International Development in its very meaning is geared towards colonies that gained independence. The governance of the newly independent states should be constructed so that the inhabitants enjoy freedom from poverty, hunger, and insecurity.
It has been argued that this era was launched on January 20, 1949, when Harry S. Truman made these remarks in his inaugural address:
Before this date, however, the United States had already taken a leading role in the creation of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (now part of the World Bank Group) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), both established in 1944, and in the United Nations in 1945.
The launch of the Marshall Plan was another important step in setting the agenda for international development, combining humanitarian goals with the creation of a political and economic bloc in Europe that was allied to the U.S. This agenda was given conceptual support during the 1950s in the form of modernization theory espoused by Walt Rostow and other American economists. The changes in the 'developed' world's approach to international development were further necessitated by the gradual collapse of Western Europe's empires over the next decades; now independent ex-colonies no longer received support in return for their subordinate role.
By the late 1960s, dependency theory arose analysing the evolving relationship between the West and the Third World. In the 1970s and early 1980s, the modernists at the World Bank and IMF adopted the neoliberal ideas of economists such as Milton Friedman or Bela Balassa, which were implemented in the form of structural adjustment programs, while their opponents were promoting various 'bottom up' approaches, ranging from civil disobedience and conscientization to appropriate technology and Rapid Rural Appraisal.
In response various parts of the UN system led a counter movement, which in the long run has proved to be successful. They were led initially by the International Labour Organization (ILO), influenced by Paul Streeten, then by UNICEF. Then UNDP, even though headed by a conservative US republican, put forward the concept of Human Development, thanks to Mahboub ul Haq and Amartya Sen, thus changing the nature of the development dialogue to focus on human needs and capabilities.
By the 1990s, there were some writers for whom development theory had reached an impasse and some academics were imagining a postdevelopment era. The Cold War had ended, capitalism had become the dominant mode of social organization, and UN statistics showed that living standards around the world had improved over the past 40 years. Nevertheless, a large portion of the world's population were still living in poverty, their governments were crippled by debt and concerns about the environmental impact of globalization were rising.
In response to the impasse, the rhetoric of development is now focusing on the issue of poverty, with the metanarrative of modernization being replaced by shorter term vision embodied by the Millennium Development Goals and the Human Development approach. At the same time, some development agencies are exploring opportunities for public-private partnerships and promoting the idea of Corporate social responsibility with the apparent aim of integrating international development with the process of economic globalization.
The critics have suggested that this integration has always been part of the underlying agenda of development. They argue that poverty can be equated with powerlessness, and that the way to overcome poverty is through emancipatory social movements and civil society, not paternalistic aid programmes or corporate charity. This approach is embraced by organizations such as the Gamelan Council seeking to empower entrepreneurs (e.g., through microfinance initiatives). These criticism have been somewhat addressed in the more embracing form of international integrated development Runde (2016)  on which the Strategic Development Goals of the United Nations are based, and which aim to integrate institutional approaches to reduce overlap and conflicting objectives and to address the overall wellbeing of development recipients.
While some critics have been debating the end of development others have predicted a development revival as part of the War on Terrorism. To date, however, there is limited evidence to support the notion that aid budgets are being used to counter Islamic fundamentalism in the same way that they were used 40 years ago to counter communism.


== Theories ==

There are a number of theories about how desirable change in society is best achieved. Such theories draw on a variety of social scientific disciplines and approaches, and include historical theories such as:
Modernization Theory
Dependency Theory
World Systems Theory


=== Millennium Development Goals ===

In 2000, United Nations signed the United Nations Millennium Declaration, which includes eight Millennium Development Goals to be achieved by 2015 or 2020. This represented the first time that a holistic strategy to meet the development needs of the world has been established, with measurable targets and defined indicators.
Because the MDGs were agreed as global targets to be achieved by the global community, they are independent of, but by no means unrelated to, individual national interests. The goals imply that every state has a set of obligations to the world community to meet and that other states, who have achieved those goals, have an obligation to help those who have not. As such they may represent an extension of the concept of human rights.
The first seven Millennium Development Goals present measurable goals, while the eighth lists a number of 'stepping stone' goals  ways in which progress towards the first seven goals could be made. Each goal uses indicators based on statistical series collected and maintained by respected organisations in each relevant field ( usually the UN agency responsible but also the OECD, IMF and World Bank)
The MDGs have catalysed a significant amount of action, including new initiatives such as Millennium Promise. Most of these initiatives however work in small scale interventions which do not reach the millions of people required by the MDGs.
Recent praise has been that it will be impossible to meet the first seven goals without meeting the eighth by forming a Global Partnership for Development. No current organisation has the capacity to dissolve the enormous problems of the developing world alone  especially in cities, where an increasing number of poor people live  as demonstrated by the almost nonexistent progress on the goal of improving the lives of at least 100 Million slum dwellers.
The Institution of Civil Engineers Engineering Without Frontiers panel and its recommendations, and the 2007 Brunel Lecture by the ICE's 20092010 president Paul Jowitt, are representative of a change of approach in the UK at least to start drawing together the huge capacity available to western governments, industry, academia and charity to develop such a partnership.


=== Other goals ===
International development also aims to improve general government policies of these developing countries. "State building" is the strengthening of regional institutions necessary to support long-term economic, social, and political development. Education is another important aspect of international development. It is a good example of how the focus today is on sustainable development in these countries; education gives people the skills required to keep themselves out of poverty.


== Concepts ==
International development is related to the concept of international aid, but is distinct from disaster relief and humanitarian aid. While these two forms of international support seek to alleviate some of the problems associated with a lack of development, they are most often short term fixes  they are not necessarily long-term solutions. International development, on the other hand, seeks to implement long-term solutions to problems by helping developing countries create the necessary capacity needed to provide such sustainable solutions to their problems. A truly sustainable development project is one which will be able to carry on indefinitely with no further international involvement or support, whether it be financial or otherwise.
International development projects may consist of a single, transformative project to address a specific problem or a series of projects targeted at several aspects of society. Promoted projects are ones which involve problem solving that reflects the unique culture, politics, geography, and economy of a region. More recently, the focus in this field has been projects that aim towards empowering women, building local economies, and caring for the environment.
In context of human development it usually encompasses foreign aid, governance, healthcare, education, poverty reduction, gender equality, disaster preparedness, infrastructure, economics, human rights, environment and issues associated with these.
In terms of international development practice on the ground, the concept of community development has had an influential contribution since the 1950s. The United Nations defines community development as "a process where community members come together to take collective action and generate solutions to common problems." It is a broad term given to the practices aiming to build stronger and more resilient local communities. Community development is also a professional discipline, and is defined by the International Association for Community Development (www.iacdglobal.org), the global network of community development practitioners and scholars, as "a practice-based profession and an academic discipline that promotes participative democracy, sustainable development, rights, economic opportunity, equality and social justice, through the organisation, education and empowerment of people within their communities, whether these be of locality, identity or interest, in urban and rural settings". Community development practitioners, using a myriad of job titles, are employed by governmental and non-governmental organisations to build the capacity of vulnerable people to engage in development projects and programmes. According to the IACD, there are national networks of community development practitioners in many countries, several hundred graduate programmes training practitioners and an extensive canon of research and scholarship, including the international Community Development Journal(http://cdj.oxfordjournals.org/).
During recent decades, development thinking has shifted from modernization and structural adjustment programs to poverty reduction. Under the former system, poor countries were encouraged to undergo social and economical structural transformations as part of their development, creating industrialization and intentional industrial policy. Poverty reduction rejects this notion, consisting instead of direct budget support for social welfare programs that create macroeconomic stability leading to an increase in economic growth.
The concept of poverty can apply to different circumstances depending on context. Poverty is the condition of lacking economic access to fundamental human needs such as food, shelter and safe drinking water. While some define poverty primarily in economic terms, others consider social and political arrangements also to be intrinsic  often manifested in a lack of dignity.


=== International Economic Inequality ===

International development institutions and International Organisations such as the UN promote the realisation of the fact that economic practices such as rapid globalisation and certain aspects of international capitalism can lead to, and, allegedly, have led to an economic divide between countries, sometimes called the North-South divide. Such organisations often make it a goal and to help reduce these divides by encouraging co-operation amongst the Global South and other practices and policies that can accomplish this.
International development can also cause inequality between richer and poorer factions of one nation's society. For example, when economic growth boosts development and industrialisation, it can create a class divide by creating demand for more educated people in order to maintain corporate and industrial profitability. Thus the popular demand for education, which in turn drives the cost of education higher through the principle of supply and demand, as people would want to be part of the new economic elite. Higher costs for education lead to a situation where only the people with enough money to pay for education can receive sufficient education to qualify for the better-paying jobs that mass-development brings about. This restricts poorer people to lesser-paying jobs but technological development makes some of these jobs obsolete (for example, by introducing electronic machines to take over a job, such as creating a series of machines such as lawn mowers to make people such as gardeners obsolete). This leads to a situation where poorer people can't improve their lives as easily as they could have in a less developed society. That is partially why institutions such as the Center for Global Development are searching for "pro-poor" economic policies.


=== Dignity ===

Modern poverty reduction and development programmes often have dignity as a central theme. Dignity is also a central theme of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the very first article of which starts with:
"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights."
The concept of dignity in development has been extensively explored by many, and related to all of the development sectors. For example, in Development with Dignity Amit Bhaduri argues that full employment with dignity for all is both important and possible in India, while the UN Millennium Project's task force on Water and Sanitation links the sector directly to dignity in the report Health, Dignity and Development: What will it take?. The Asian Human Rights Commission released a statement in 2006 claiming that:

Human dignity is the true measure of human development.

Humanizing Development Global Photography Campaign


=== Participation ===

The concept of participation is concerned with ensuring that the intended beneficiaries of development projects and programmes are themselves involved in the planning and execution of those projects and programmes. This is considered important as it empowers the recipients of development projects to influence and manage their own development - thereby removing any culture of dependency. It is widely considered to be one of the most important concepts in modern development theory. The UN System Network on Rural Development and Food Security describes participation as:

one of the ends as well as one of the means of development

Local participants in development projects are often products of oral communities. This has led to efforts to design project planning and organizational development methods, such as participatory rural appraisal, which are accessible to non-literate people.


=== Appropriateness ===

The concept of something being appropriate is concerned with ensuring that a development project or programme is of the correct scale and technical level, and is culturally and socially suitable for its beneficiaries. This should not be confused with ensuring something is low-technology, cheap or basic  a project is appropriate if it is acceptable to its recipients and owners, economically affordable and sustainable in the context in which it is executed.
For example, in a rural sub-Saharan community it may not be appropriate to provide a chlorinated and pumped water system because it cannot be maintained or controlled adequately  simple hand pumps may be better; while in a big city in the same country it would be inappropriate to provide water with hand pumps, and the chlorinated system would be the correct response.
The economist E. F. Schumacher championed the cause of appropriate technology and founded the organization ITDG (Intermediate Technology Design Group), which develops and provides appropriate technologies for development (ITDG has now been renamed Practical Action).
The concept of right-financing has been developed to reflect the need for public and private financial support systems that foster and enable development, rather than hinder it.


=== Sustainability ===

A sustainable approach to development is one which takes account of economic, social and environmental factors to produce projects and programmes which will have results which are not dependent on finite resources. Something which is sustainable will not use more natural resources than the local environment can supply; more financial resources than the local community and markets can sustain; and will have the necessary support from the community, government and other stakeholders to carry on indefinitely.
It is one of the key concepts in international development, and is critical in removing dependency on overseas aid.


=== Capacity building ===

Capacity building for some is concerned with increasing the ability of the recipients of development projects to continue their future development alone, without external support. It is a parallel concept to sustainability, as it furthers the ability of a society to function independently of external factors. For others it has had a wider connotation for several decades.
For example, the lead within the UN system for action and thinking in this area was given to UNDP and it has offered guidance to its staff and governments on what was then called institution building since the early 1970s. This involved building up the ability of basic national organizations, in areas such as civil aviation, meteorology, agriculture, health, nutrition to do their tasks well. All UN specialized agencies were supposed to be active in support of capacity building in the areas for which they were technically qualified e.g. FAO for the rural sector and agriculture, WHO for health etc., but they achieved mixed results. USAID UK/DFID and some of the Nordic donors were also active in the area, as were some of the Soviet bloc countries, but the success of their efforts were affected by the perception that national political interests motivated their efforts.
By 1991, the term had evolved and become 'capacity building'. UNDP defined 'capacity building' as the creation of an enabling environment with appropriate policy and legal frameworks, institutional development, including community participation (of women in particular), human resources development and strengthening of managerial systems, adding that, UNDP recognizes that capacity building is a long-term, continuing process, in which all stakeholders participate (ministries, local authorities, non-governmental organizations and water user groups, professional associations, academics and others).
By 1995, the UN General Assembly had commissioned and received (1998) evaluations of the impact of the UN system's support for capacity building. These evaluations were carried out as part of the UN General Assembly's triennial policy review during which it looks at and provides overall guidance of all UN system development activities (http://www.un.org/esa/coordination/public_multi.htm 2nd& 3rd entries). It remains a protean concept used by different agencies in different ways to serve their respective agendas. One essential element common to most serious organisations working in the field is that it covers much more than training.


=== Rights-based approach ===

Rights-based approach to development has been adopted by many nongovernmental organizations and the United Nations as the new approach to international development. Rights-based approach combines many different concepts of international development, such as capacity building, human rights, participation, and sustainability. The goal of the rights-based approach to development is to empower the rights-holders, or the group that does not exercise full rights, and strengthen the capacity of the duty-bearers, or the institution or government obligated to fill these rights.


== Practice ==


=== Measurement ===

The judging of how developed a country or a community is highly subjective, often highly controversial, and very important in judging what further development is necessary or desirable.
There are many different measures of human development, many of them related to the different sectors above. Some of them are:
Gross National Happiness
Literacy rates
Gini coefficient
National GDP
Per capita income
Human Development Index
Human Security Index  see external link and mention on Human security
Life expectancy
Number of doctors per capita
Maternal survival rate
HIV infection rates
An interesting way of seeing development in Third World countries is through modernization. This includes electronification of households and increases in phone plans. This does not accurately convey social development although it is hard to precisely measure, and institutions differ greatly in their methods. This goes into the debate on whether economic growth causes social growth or vice versa. Indicators of social change can be used to complement economic factors as indicators of development and in formulating development policies.
In a multi-country review of development progress, improved outcomes on these measures has generally been found to be driven by a combination of smart leadership, policies, institutions, and friends, according to the Overseas Development Institute.


=== Migration and remittance ===

Migration has throughout history also led to significant international development. As people move, their culture, knowledge, skills and technologies move with them. Migrants' ties with their past homes and communities lead to international relationships and further flows of goods, capital and knowledge. The value of remittances sent home by migrants in modern times is much greater than the total in international aid given.


=== Sectors ===
International development and disaster relief are both often grouped into sectors, which correlate with the major themes of international development (and with the Millennium Development Goals  which are included in the descriptions below). There is no clearly defined list of sectors, but some of the more established and universally accepted sectors are further explored here. The sectors are highly interlinked, illustrating the complexity of the problems they seek to deal with.


==== Water and sanitation ====

In development, this is the provision of water and sanitation (toilets, bathing facilities, a healthy environment) of sufficient quantity and quality to supply an acceptable standard of living. This is different from a relief response, where it is the provision of water and sanitation in sufficient quantity and quality to maintain life.
The provision of water and sanitation is primarily an engineering challenge, but also often includes an education element and is closely connected with shelter, politics and human rights.
The seventh Millennium Development Goal is to ensure environmental sustainability, including reducing by half the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and achieving significant improvement in lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers, by 2020. UN-Water, a body of 26 UN agencies that work on water issues, is responsible for the triennial UN World Water Development Report which monitors progress towards the Millennium Development Goals related to water. The World Water Assessment Programme, which produces the Report, has articulated how eight of the MDGs are linked to water resources.
Examples of organisations specialising in Water and Sanitation are:
Oxfam
World Vision
Water 1st International
WaterAid
WaterPartners International
Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council
Living Water International
Partners in aid (watershed management in India, and sanitation in the Philippines)
Charity: water


==== Health ====

This is provision of access to quality healthcare to the population in an efficient and consistent manner and according to their needs. The standard and level of provision that is acceptable or appropriate depends on many factors and is highly specific to country and location. For example, in large city (whether in a 'developing' country or not), it is appropriate and often practical to provide a high standard hospital which can offer a full range of treatments; in a remote rural community it may be more appropriate and practical to provide a visiting healthworker on a periodic basis, possibly with a rural clinic serving several different communities.
The provision of access to healthcare is both an engineering challenge as it requires infrastructure such as hospitals and transport systems and an education challenge as it requires qualified healthworkers and educated consumers.
The fourth Millennium Development Goal is to reduce by two thirds the mortality rate among children under five.
The fifth Millennium Development Goal is to reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio.
The sixth Millennium Development Goal is to halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and to halt and begin to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
Reaching these goals is also a management challenge. Health services need to make the best use of limited resources while providing the same quality of care to every man, woman and child everywhere. Achieving this level of services requires innovation, quality improvement and expansion of public health services and programs. The main goal is to make public health truly public.
Examples of organizations working in health are:
World Health Organization
Partners in Health
Results for Development Institute


==== Education ====

The provision of education often focuses on providing free primary level education, but also covers secondary and higher education. A lack of access to education is one of the primary limits on human development, and is related closely to every one of the other sectors. Almost every development project includes an aspect of education as development by its very nature requires a change in the way people live.
The second Millennium Development Goal is to Provide universal primary education.
The provision of education is itself an education challenge, as it requires qualified teachers who must be trained in higher education institutions. However, donors are unwilling to provide support to higher education because their policies now target the MDG. The result is that students are not educated by qualified professionals and worse, when they graduate from primary school they are inducted into a secondary school system that is not able to accommodate them.


==== Shelter ====
The provision of appropriate shelter is concerned with providing suitable housing for families and communities. It is highly specific to context of culture, location, climate and other factors. In development, it is concerned with providing housing of an appropriate quality and type to accommodate people in the long term. This is distinct from shelter in relief, which is concerned with providing sufficient shelter to maintain life.
Examples of organisations specialising in shelter are:
UN-HABITAT (development)
UNHCR (relief)
Shelter Centre (relief)
Architecture for Humanity (relief and development)
Article 25 (relief and development)


==== Human rights ====

The provision of human rights is concerned with ensuring that all people everywhere receive the rights conferred on them by International human rights instruments [1]. There are many of these, but the most important for international development are:
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and its associated treaties
The Convention on the Rights of the Child
The Geneva Conventions (this is of more relevance to relief and military practices than development)
Human rights covers a huge range of topics. Some of those more relevant to international development projects include rights associated with gender equality, justice, employment, social welfare and culture.
The third Millennium Development Goal is to promote gender equality and empower women by eliminating gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005, and at all levels by 2015. Accomplishing this goal could assist in the achievement of the other Millennium Development Goals. Rates of poverty, education, child mortality, for example, are in direct correlation with the status of women. Low social status and limited access to productive resources inhibit women from participating equally in their communities. Providing girls with equal access to quality education brings the global community steps closer to achieving universal primary education.


==== Livelihoods ====

This is concerned with ensuring that all people are able to make a living for themselves and provide themselves with an adequate standard of living, without compromising their human rights and while maintaining dignity.
The first Millennium Development Goal is to reduce by half the proportion of people living on less than a dollar a day and reduce by half the proportion of people who suffer from hunger.
The concept of livelihoods is directly drawn from the Sustainable Livelihoods Approach (SLA) to international development. The approach and subsequent practical framework is credited to Robert Chambers, who, writing from the mid-1980s and onward, was interested in fostering efficiency in development cooperation. The approach was later developed and utilized by the United Kingdom's Department for International Development (DFID).The approach is considered to be more comprehensive than previous theories and methodology of "conventional" development initiatives. The core concepts include: taking a holistic view, building on community and individual strengths, focusing on linking both macro and micro-level thinking, sustainability, and maintaining a dynamic and ever-evolving framework. [2]


==== Finance ====

Several organisations and initiatives exist which are concerned with providing financial systems and frameworks which allow people to organise or purchase services, items or projects for their own development.
The 2006 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded jointly to Muhammad Yunus and the Grameen Bank, which he founded, for their work in providing microcredit to the poor.


== Concerns ==

The terms "developed" and "developing" (or "underdeveloped"), have proven problematic in forming policy as they ignore issues of wealth distribution and the lingering effects of colonialism. Some theorists see development efforts as fundamentally neo-colonial, in which a wealthier nation forces its industrial and economic structure on a poorer nation, which will then become a consumer of the developed nation's goods and services. Post-developmentalists, for example, see development as a form of Western cultural imperialism that hurts the people of poor countries and endangers the environment to such an extent that they suggest rejection of development altogether. In relation to ethnic groups, these concerns are captured in Survival International's There You Go! (Oren Ginzburg).


== See also ==


== References ==


=== Notes ===


=== Bibliography ===
Allen, T. and Thomas, A. (2000). Poverty and development into the 21st century. OUP. ISBN 0-19-877626-8
Barlett, Andrew (2007). Plans or People: What are our Priorities for Rural Development?. Rural Development News. (No.1) Agridea.
Bhaduri, Amit (2005). Development With Dignity. National Book Trust. ISBN 81-237-4596-6
Browne, S. (1990) Foreign aid in practice. New York University Press. ISBN 0-86187-723-3
Develtere, P. (2012). How Do We Help? The Free Market In Development Aid Leuven University Press. ISBN 978-90-5867-902-4
Escobar, A. (1995) Encountering development: the making and unmaking of the third world, Princeton. ISBN 0-691-03409-5
Fukuyama, Francis (2006) The End of History and the Last Man. Free Press. ISBN 0-02-910975-2
Korten, D,C. (1995). When corporations rule the world. Berrett-Koehler Publishers. ISBN 1-887208-00-3
Moss, T., Roodman, D. and Standley, S. (2005). The Global War on Terror and U.S. Development Assistance: USAID allocation by country, 19982005  Working Paper 62. Center for Global Development
David Mosse (ed.): Adventures in Aid Land  The Anthropology of Professionals in International Development, Berghahn Books, Oxford/New York 2010 ISBN 978-0-85745-110-1
Parfitt, T. (2002). The end of development? Modernity, Post-Modernity and Development. Pluto press. ISBN 0-7453-1637-9
Sachs, W (ed.) (1992). The Development Dictionary: a guide to knowledge as power, Zed Books. ISBN 1-85649-044-0
Schuurman, F.J. (1993) Beyond the impasse: new directions in development theory. Zed Books. ISBN 1-85649-210-9
Skelton, T. and Allen, T. (1999). Culture and Global Change, Routledge. ISBN 0-415-13916-3
Sphere Project (2003). Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response (Sphere Handbook 2004 Edition). London: Oxfam Publishing. ISBN 92-9139-097-6.
Stockholm International Water Institute (2005). Health, Dignity and Development: What Will It Take?. UN Millennium Project. ISBN 91-974183-8-2
Utting, P. (2003) Promoting Development through Corporate Social Responsibility  Does it Work?. Global Future, Third Quarter 2003, Profit and Loss? Corporations and Development. London: World Vision International.
Wroe, M and Doney, M. (2005). The rough guide to a better world. UK: Rough Guides Ltd. ISBN 1-84353-476-2
Catholic Relief Services (2009). Water and Conflict: Incorporating Peacebuilding into Water Development. US: CRS.


== External links ==
Global South Development Magazine, a free magazine of international development issues.
AidData: Tracking Development Finance
The Participation, Power and Social Change research team at the Institute of Development Studies
Overseas Development Institute  Independent UK Think Tank focusing on a wide range of development issues
Climate and Development Knowledge Network, run by an alliance of organisations that include PwC and ODI
Center for Global Development  Independent Washington-based research organization
Development Gateway  An international non-profit that empowers development actors using information and communications technology
The Human Development Reports
Human Security Index Human Security Index Website with HSI data, and a Human Development Index covering 232 countries
World Bank YouThink  Simple guide to the main issues
USAID  U.S. Agency for International Development  The U.S. Government's primary development agency
MCA  U.S. Millennium Challenge Account
DFID  Department for International Development  The UK Government department responsible for promoting sustainable development
Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, Oxford Department of International Development, University of Oxford
Zunia, an online network for knowledge exchange among development professionals worldwide.
Karsten Weitzenegger's collection of job opportunities from various international development portals
Crook, Clive (1992). "Third World Economic Development". In David R. Henderson (ed.). Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (1st ed.). Library of Economics and Liberty.  OCLC 317650570, 50016270, 163149563
  The Vrinda Project Channel - videos on the work in progress for the achievement of the MDGs connected to the Wikibook   Development Cooperation Handbook
International Development research on IssueLabThe National Protection and Programs Directorate (NPPD) is a component within the United States Department of Homeland Security. NPPD's goal is to advance the Department's national security mission by reducing and eliminating threats to the Nations critical physical and cyber infrastructure.
The NPPD is led by the Under Secretary of Homeland Security for National Protection and Programs, who is appointed by the President of the United States with confirmation by the United States Senate. The current Under Secretary is Suzanne E. Spaulding.


== Overview ==
NPPD is the lead component of the United States Department of Homeland Security in the protection of the Nations physical and cyber critical infrastructure and key resources from terrorist attacks, natural disasters, and other catastrophic incidents. NPPD collaborates and shares information with Federal, State, local, tribal, international, and private-sector partners.
NPPD has three major program activities:
Cyber Security and Communications  Collaborates with public, private, and international partners to ensure the security and continuity of the Nations cyber and communications infrastructures in the event of terrorist attacks, natural disasters, and catastrophic incidents. Additionally, Cyber Security and Communications protects and strengthens the reliability, survivability, and interoperability of the Nations communications capabilities, including those utilized during emergencies, at the Federal, State, local, and tribal levels. Responsible for overseeing the National Cyber Security Division.
Infrastructure Protection  Leads coordinated efforts for reducing risk to the Nations physical critical infrastructure and key resources from terrorist attacks, natural disasters, and other catastrophic incidents by integrating and disseminating critical infrastructure and key resources threat, consequence, and vulnerability information; developing risk mitigation strategies; and overseeing the developing and implementation of the National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP). These efforts help to ensure that essential Government missions, public services, and economic functions are maintained. IP also ensures that critical infrastructure and key resources elements are not exploited for use as weapons of mass destruction against people or institutions through regulatory initiatives such as its Ammonium Nitrate and Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) programs.
Federal Protective Service  Leads the Departments comprehensive security and law enforcement services for mitigating risk to more than 9,000 Federal facilities and their 1.1 million occupants nationwide. Operational activities include law enforcement response; risk assessments of Federal facilities to determine, recommend, and install appropriate risk mitigation measures; and oversight of between 12,000 and 15,000 armed contract protective security officers, depending on customer requirements. Further, personnel conduct criminal investigations, provide regular security awareness training to stakeholders, and provide support to major events.
United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology Program - US-VISIT supports the Department of Homeland Security's responsibility to protect the nation by providing biometric identification services that help federal, state, and local government decision makers accurately identify the people they encounter and determine whether those people pose a risk to the United States. US-VISIT supplies the technology for collecting and storing biometric data, provides analysis, updates its watchlist, and ensures the integrity of the data.


== Management ==
Senior officials within the NPPD include:
Under Secretary of Homeland Security for National Protection and Programs
Deputy Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Cyber Security
Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security for Cyber Security and Communications
Office of Cyber Security and Communications
Office of Emergency Communications
National Cyber Security and Communications Integration Center
Stakeholder Engagement and Cyber Infrastructure Resilience
Federal Network Resilience
Network Security Deployment
Sector Specific Agency Executive Management Office
Communications Branch
Information Technology Branch

Office of Cyber Security Coordination

Deputy Under Secretary of Homeland Security for National Protection and Programs
Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security for Infrastructure Protection
Office of Infrastructure Protection
Chemical Security Compliance Division
Infrastructure Information Collection Division
Infrastructure Analysis and Strategy Division
Protective Security Coordination Division
Sector Specific Agency Executive Management Office
Chemical Branch
Commercial Facilities Branch
Dams Branch
Emergency Services Branch
Nuclear Branch

Partnership and Outreach Division

Director, Federal Protective Service
Federal Protective Service

Director, Office of Biometric Identification Management
Office of Biometric Identification Management (formerly US-VISIT)


== Budget ==


== Subcomponents ==
The subcomponents of the National Protection and Programs Directorate include the Federal Protective Service, Office of Cybersecurity and Communications, Office of Infrastructure Protection, Office of Intergovernmental Programs, Office of Risk Management and Analysis, and US-VISIT.


=== Federal Protective Service ===
Federal Protective Service is a federal law enforcement agency that provides integrated security and law enforcement services to federally owned and leased buildings, courthouses, facilities, properties and other assets, as well as the personnel associated with them.


=== Office of Cybersecurity and Communications ===
The Office of Cybersecurity and Communications has the mission of assuring the security, resiliency, and reliability of the nations cyber and communications infrastructure. Includes the National Cyber Security Division.
The National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center coordinates responses to cyber attacks and is headquartered in Arlington, Virginia.


=== Office of Infrastructure Protection ===
The Office of Infrastructure Protection leads the coordinated national effort to reduce risk to the United States' critical infrastructures and key resources (CIKR) posed by acts of terrorism. In doing so, the Department increases the nation's level of preparedness and the ability to respond and quickly recover in the event of an attack, natural disaster, or other emergency.


=== Office of Intergovernmental Programs ===
The Office of Intergovernmental Programs has the mission of promoting an integrated national approach to homeland security by ensuring, coordinating, and advancing federal interaction with state, local, tribal, and territorial governments.


=== Office of Risk Management and Analysis ===
The Office of Risk Management and Analysis serves as the Departments Executive Agent for national risk management and analysis. According to the president's proposed Fiscal Year 2013 budget the Office of Risk Management and Analysis may be transferred to DHS Office of Policy.


=== Office of Biometric Identity Management (OBIM)  formerly US-VISIT ===
The Office of Biometric Identity Management (OBIM), formerly the United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology (US-VISIT) uses innovative biometrics-based technological solutionsdigital fingerprints and photographsto provide decision-makers with accurate information when and where they need it. According to the President's proposed Fiscal Year 2013 budget the US-VISIT program may be transferred to Customs and Border Protection and Immigration and Customs Enforcement. However, through proposed 2013 Continuing Resolutions, both the House of Representatives and Senate rejected the President's proposal for full transfer of the program. Instead, the Senate establishes the Office of Biometric Identity Management under NPPD, with US-VISIT's mission operations moving to Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Likewise, the House proposed keeping the US-VISIT Program as-is under NPPD.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteThe Taiwan Excellence Awards are awards that are delivered by the Ministry of Economic Affairs (MOEA) and Taiwan External Trade Development Council (TAITRA) to encourage Taiwan industries to upgrade and incorporate innovation and value into their products. The selection of awards is based on four criteria: R&D, design, quality, and marketing. Each product must score evenly well in each category in order to be selected. An international panel of judges is invited to participate in this selection, in which the finalists surface after several evaluations.
Several plans were launched to promote the product designs, qualities and images of Taiwan: Quality Enhancement Plan (1988), Product Design Ability Enhancement Plan (1989), and the 1990 Image Enhancement Plan (IEP). This eventually led to the Branding Taiwan Project  developed in 2006 with strong focus on the IEP. The IEP steadily enhanced the image of MIT products in three different stages with a specific objective during each stage:
First stage (19901995): Focus on improving the negative image of MIT products.
Second stage (19952000): An important criterion, innovalue ("innovation" plus "added value"), was created.
Third stage (current stage): Image reformation of MIT products through an integrated global information campaign.
The objective is to transform Taiwan from a regional manufacturing center into a global R&D and innovation center.


== Type of Awards [1] ==
Taiwan Excellence Awards. After careful evaluation, the judges select the products which are authorized to display the symbol of Taiwan Excellence attached with the winning year.Silver Awards. A panel of judges elects up to 30 finalists from the Taiwan Excellence Award winners for screening. After the gold winners are selected, the remaining are awarded with the Silver Awards.Gold Awards. A maximum of eight products may be awarded with the Gold Award.Taiwan Excellence for Best Performance. An award that is delivered to the corporation who won the most Gold & Silver Awards for the year.Taiwan Excellence Achievement Awards. Presented to the companies who have earned at least 50 Taiwan Excellence Awards during the past years.Popularity Award. The public participates in the nomination of the 30 finalists and the most popular product is awarded.


== 2008 Taiwan Excellence Award Winners ==
Gold Awards (8)
Silver Awards (21)
Certificates for Taiwan Excellence (112)
Taiwan Excellence for Best Performance (1)
Taiwan Excellence Achievement Award (2)
Popularity Award (1)


== 2009 Taiwan Excellence Award Winners ==
Gold Award Winners List (8): Eee PC S101 -ASUSTeK Computer Inc.
City Speed -Giant Manufacturing Co., Ltd.
Touch Diamond -High Tech Computer Corp.
Energy Conservation Driving Module -Hiwin Technologies Corp.
Pico Pocket Projector -Optoma Corp.
WorldCard -Penpower Technology Ltd.
Ratcheting Adjustable Wrench -Proxene Tools Co., Ltd.
Rice Cooker -Tatung Co.
Silver Award Winners List (22): PocketCinema -AIPTEK International Inc.
3.5G Super Performance PDA Phone -ASUSTeK Computer Inc.
Bamboo Series Notebook Bamboo -ASUSTeK Computer Inc.
Short-Throw Gaming Projector -BenQ Corp.
19-inch Wide Panel -Chi Mei Optoelectronics Corp.
Taiwan Blue Magpie Collection -Franz Collection Inc.
TCR Advanced SL TCR Advanced -Giant Manufacturing Co., Ltd.
Linear Motor Air Bearing Platform -Hiwin Mikrosystem Corp.
Treadmill - Johnson Health Tech. Co., Ltd.
Functional Trainer - Johnson Health Tech. Co., Ltd.
Vertical Machining Center -Kao Fong Machinery Co., Ltd.
Jockey G5 125/150 -Kwang Yang Industry Co., Ltd.
Solargizer leading desktop combo -KYE Systems Corp.(Genius)
Full suspension MTB  One Five O -Mrida Industry Co., Ltd.
Elixir DDR3 SODIMM series -Nanya Technology Corporation
Pacific IF -Pacific Cycles, Inc.
Refrigerator -Panasonic Taiwan Co., Ltd.
All Terrain Vehicle (ATV) -Taiwan Golden Bee Co., Ltd.
Fine Arts Counter Top Gas Hobs -Taiwan Sakura Corporation
Fine Arts Chimney Range Hood -Taiwan Sakura Corp.
Dual-Band Wireless-N Router -ZyXEL Communications Corp.
WiMAX Indoor Femto Base Station -ZyXEL Communications Corp.


== References ==

Photos of 2008 Taiwan Excellence Awards ceremony [2]
About TAITRA Taiwan External Trade Development Council
2009 Taiwan Excellence Awards [3]
Taiwan Excellence in the ICT industry [4]
Media Releases [5]
Taiwan Excellence Awards 2011 [6]A client is a piece of computer hardware or software that accesses a service made available by a server. The server is often (but not always) on another computer system, in which case the client accesses the service by way of a network. The term applies to the role that programs or devices play in the clientserver model.


== Overview ==
A client is a computer program that, as part of its operation, relies on sending a request to another computer program (which may or may not be located on another computer). For example, web browsers are clients that connect to web servers and retrieve web pages for display. Email clients retrieve email from mail servers. Online chat uses a variety of clients, which vary depending on the chat protocol being used. Multiplayer video games or online video games may run as a client on each computer. The term "client" may also be applied to computers or devices that run the client software or users that use the client software.
A client is part of a clientserver model, which is still used today. Clients and servers may be computer programs run on the same machine and connect via inter-process communication techniques. Combined with Internet sockets, programs may connect to a service operating on a possibly remote system through the Internet protocol suite. Servers wait for potential clients to initiate connections that they may accept.
The term was first applied to devices that were not capable of running their own stand-alone programs, but could interact with remote computers via a network. These dumb terminals were clients of the time-sharing mainframe computer.


== Types ==
In one classification, client computers and devices are either fat clients, thin clients, or hybrid clients.


=== Fat ===

A fat client, also known as a rich client or thick client, is a client that performs the bulk of any data processing operations itself, and does not necessarily rely on the server. The personal computer is a common example of a fat client, because of its relatively large set of features and capabilities and its light reliance upon a server. For example, a computer running a CAD program (such as AutoCAD or CATIA) that ultimately shares the result of its work on a network is a fat client.


=== Thin ===

A thin client is a minimal sort of client. Thin clients use the resources of the host computer. A thin client generally only presents processed data provided by an application server, which performs the bulk of any required data processing. A device using web application (such as Office Web Apps) is a thin client.


=== Hybrid ===
A hybrid client is a mixture of the above two client models. Similar to a fat client, it processes locally, but relies on the server for storing persistent data. This approach offers features from both the fat client (multimedia support, high performance) and the thin client (high manageability, flexibility). A device running an online version of the video game Diablo III is an example of hybrid client.


== References ==A chief executive officer (CEO) or managing director (MD) describes the position of the most senior corporate officer, executive, leader or administrator in charge of managing an organization. CEOs lead a range of organizations, including public and private corporations, non-profit organizations and even some government organizations (e.g., Crown corporations). The CEO of a corporation or company typically reports to the board of directors and is charged with maximizing the value of the entity, which may include maximizing the share price, market share, revenues, or another element. In the non-profit and government sector, CEOs typically aim at achieving outcomes related to the organization's mission, such as reducing poverty, increasing literacy, etc. Titles also often given to the holder of CEO position include president and chief executive (CE).


== Responsibilities ==
The responsibilities of an organization's CEO are set by the organization's board of directors or other authority, depending on the organization's legal structure. They can be far-reaching or quite limited and are typically enshrined in a formal delegation of authority. Typically, responsibilities include decision maker on strategy and other key policy issues, leader, manager, and executor. The communicator role can involve speaking to the press and the rest of the outside world, as well as to the organization's management and employees; the decision-making role involves high-level decisions about policy and strategy. As a leader of the company, the CEO/MD advises the board of directors, motivates employees, and drives change within the organization. As a manager, the CEO/MD presides over the organization's day-to-day operations. The term refers to the person who makes all the key decisions regarding the company, which includes all sectors and fields of the business, including operations, marketing, business development, finance, human resources, etc. The CEO of a company is not necessarily the owner of the company.


== Characteristics ==
According to a study by Carola Frydman of MIT, from 1936 to the early 2000s, there has been a rapid increase in the share of CEOs holding an MBA; from approximately 10% of CEOs in 1960 to more than 50% by the end of the century. Earlier in the century, top executives were more likely to have technical degrees in science and engineering or law. As of 2016, there were 20 female CEOs of S&P 500 companies, approximately 4%.


=== Celebrities ===
Business publicists since the days of Edward Bernays and his client John D. Rockefeller and even more successfully the corporate publicists for Henry Ford, promoted the concept of the "celebrity CEO". Business journalists have often adopted this approach, which assumes that the corporate achievements, especially in the arena of manufacturing, were produced by unique talented individuals, especially the "heroic CEO". In effect, journalists celebrate a CEO who takes distinctive strategic actions. The model is the celebrity in entertainment, sports, and politics. Guthey et al. argue that "...these individuals are not self-made, but rather are created by a process of widespread media exposure to the point that their actions, personalities, and even private lives function symbolically to represent significant dynamics and tensions prevalent in the contemporary business atmosphere." Journalism thereby exaggerates the importance of the CEO and tends to neglect the harder-to-describe broader corporate factors. There is little attention to the intricately organized technical bureaucracy that actually does the work. Hubris sets in when the CEO internalizes the celebrity and becomes excessively self-confident in making complex decisions. Indeed, there may be an emphasis on the sort of decisions that attract the celebrity journalists.


== International use ==
In some European Union countries, there is a dual board system with two separate boards, one executive board for the day-to-day business and one supervisory board for control purposes (selected by the shareholders). In these countries, the CEO presides over the executive board and the chairman presides over the supervisory board, and these two roles will always be held by different people. This ensures a distinction between management by the executive board and governance by the supervisory board. This allows for clear lines of authority. The aim is to prevent a conflict of interest and too much power being concentrated in the hands of one person.
In the United States, the board of directors (elected by the shareholders) is often equivalent to the supervisory board, while the executive board may often be known as the executive committee (the division/subsidiary heads and C-level officers that report directly to the CEO).
In the United States, and in business, the executive officers are usually the top officers of a corporation, the chief executive officer (CEO) being the best-known type. The definition varies; for instance, the California Corporate Disclosure Act defines "executive officers" as the five most highly compensated officers not also sitting on the board of directors. In the case of a sole proprietorship, an executive officer is the sole proprietor. In the case of a partnership, an executive officer is a managing partner, senior partner, or administrative partner. In the case of a limited liability company, executive officer is any member, manager, or officer.


== Related positions ==

Typically, a CEO has several subordinate executives, each of whom has specific functional responsibilities referred to as senior executives, executive officers or corporate officers. Subordinate executives are given different titles in different organizations, but one common category of subordinate executive is the vice-president (VP). An organization may have more than one vice-president, each tasked with a different area of responsibility (e.g., VP of finance, VP of human resources, VP of research and development, etc.). Some organizations have subordinate executive officers who also have the word "Chief" in their job title, such as Chief Operating Officer (COO), Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and Chief Technology Officer (CTO).


=== US ===
In the US, the term chief executive officer is used primarily in business, whereas the term executive director is used primarily in the not-for-profit sector. These terms are generally mutually exclusive and refer to distinct legal duties and responsibilities. Implicit in the use of these titles is that the public not be misled and the general standard regarding their use be consistently applied.


=== UK ===
In the UK, "chief executive" and "chief executive officer", are used in both business and the charitable sector (not-for-profit sector). As of 2013, the use of the term director for senior charity staff is deprecated to avoid confusion with the legal duties and responsibilities associated with being a charity director or trustee, which are normally non-executive (unpaid) roles.In the United Kingdom, the term director is used instead of chief officer.


== See also ==
CEO succession
CEO of public schools
Executive officer
List of books written by CEOs
List of chief executive officers
Occupational Information Network
United States Department of Labor


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Huang, Jiekun, and Darren J. Kisgen. "Gender and corporate finance: Are male executives overconfident relative to female executives?." Journal of Financial Economics 108#3 (2013): 822-839. online
Kaplan, Steven N., Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen. "Which CEO characteristics and abilities matter?." Journal of Finance 67#3 (2012): 973-1007. online
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. "A survey of corporate governance." Journal of Finance 52#2 (1997): 737-783.
Vancil, Richard F. Passing the baton: Managing the process of CEO succession (Harvard Business School Press, 1987).


== External links ==
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics - Top Executives: Description and Outlook
20082010 Study: CEOs Who Fired Most Workers Earned Highest Pay  video report by Democracy Now!
Global CEO Directory - Searchable list of chief executive officersJim Crockett Promotions Inc. was a family-owned professional wrestling promotion headquartered in Charlotte, North Carolina, United States. Founded in 1931, the promotion emerged as a cornerstone of the National Wrestling Alliance. By the 1980s, Jim Crockett Promotions was, along with the World Wrestling Federation, one of the two largest promotions in the United States. The Crockett family sold a majority interest in the promotion to Turner Broadcasting System in 1988, resulting in the creation of World Championship Wrestling.


== History ==


=== Early history ===
Jim Crockett (19081973) was a promoter of live events including professional wrestling, music concerts, plays, minor league baseball, and ice hockey. In 1935, he founded his own professional wrestling promotion, Jim Crockett Promotions. Crockett built JCP as a regional promotion centred on the Carolinas and Virginia.
Although the business was always called "Jim Crockett Promotions," it used a variety of pseudonyms as brand names for specific TV shows, newspaper and radio ads, and even on event tickets, themselves. Among those brand names were the generic standbys, "Championship Wrestling" and "All Star Wrestling"; as well as "East Coast Wrestling"; "Mid-Atlantic Championship Wrestling"; "Mid-Atlantic Championship Sports"; "Wide World Wrestling"; and, "World Wide Wrestling".
Crockett joined the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA) in 1952, and his "territory" covered Virginia, North Carolina and South Carolina. The name "Mid-Atlantic Championship Wrestling" became JCP's primary brand name in print, radio, and other advertising (the name was also used for its main television programs). Two years later, JCP introduced the Wide World Wrestling brand name and television show (which was renamed World Wide Wrestling in 1978, and renamed WCW WorldWide in the late-1980s after its sale to Turner Broadcasting System). JCP used the "Wide World/World Wide" and "Mid-Atlantic" brands concurrently.
The business was incorporated in the 1950s.


=== 1970s ===
Jim Crockett died in 1973. He left JCP to his family, with his eldest son, Jim Crockett, Jr., taking over as chief executive.
Led by the younger Crockett and under the guidance of a new creative force -- former wrestler-turned-match-booker George Scott -- the promotion moved away from generally featuring just tag teams, to primarily focusing on singles wrestling (although tag-team matches continued to play a big part in the company).
By the early-1970s, JCP had gradually phased-out its multiple weekly television tapings in such cities as Charlotte, North Carolina, Greenville, South Carolina, and High Point, North Carolina, consolidating its production schedule into just one shoot (a Wednesday night videotaping at WRAL in Raleigh), and then syndicating the broadcast to several local TV stations throughout the Carolinas and Virginia. In 1981, JCP moved to the WPCQ studios in Charlotte (a station once owned by Ted Turner).
The local shows hosted by announcers like Big Bill Ward (from WBTV in Charlotte) and Charlie Harville (at WGHP in High Point) gave way to Mid-Atlantic Championship Wrestling (known briefly in 1978 as Mid-Atlantic Championship Sports). Mid-Atlantic was hosted by Bob Caudle (a longtime WRAL weatherman) Caudle was joined by a rotation of co-hosts (everyone from Les Thatcher to Dr. Tom Miller), before David Crockett (another son of Jim Crockett Sr.) became Caudle's permanent co-host/color commentary man (after ending a very brief career as a wrestler, himself). For a brief period, a secondary show, East Coast Wrestling, was taped at WRAL; it was basically a re-packaged version of Mid-Atlantic, and was announced by Big Bill Ward.
In 1975, JCP premiered a new, syndicated "B-show", Wide World Wrestling (renamed World Wide Wrestling in 1978). The original host of this show was former Georgia Championship Wrestling announcer Ed Capral. Subsequent Wide World/World Wide announcers included Les Thatcher, George and Sandy Scott, and Dr. Tom Miller. It was also hosted by the team of Rich Landrum and Johnny Weaver. In 1978, JCP later added a short-lived show, The Best of NWA Wrestling, which was taped at the WCCB studios in Charlotte (across the street from the old Charlotte Coliseum, a regular venue for Mid-Atlantic live events) and featured then-active wrestler Johnny Weaver sitting down with top stars in a "coach's show" format (in which host and guest did running commentary over 16 millimeter film footage of matches from local arenas). Rich Landrum and David Crockett appeared on "Best Of", doing promo interviews for local arena shows.
JCP gradually began to expand, running shows in eastern Tennessee, parts of West Virginia, and even Savannah, Georgia. In the late-1970s and early-1980s, JCP ran regular shows in Cincinnati and Dayton, Ohio. Crockett and Scott also bought minority shares of Frank Tunney's Toronto-based promotion, Maple Leaf Wrestling. Mid-Atlantic Championship Wrestling also aired on a Buffalo, New York station, enabling the Tunney/Crockett/Scott enterprise to bring a full slate of shows to Ontario and upstate New York.


=== 1980s ===
In the 1980s, Crockett, Jr. began consolidating the Southern franchises of the National Wrestling Alliance. Discarding the Mid-Atlantic Championship Wrestling brand, Crockett, Jr. began promoting his events simply as the National Wrestling Alliance, although his promotion remained distinct from the larger NWA entity.
In August 1980, Crockett, Jr. was elected president of the NWA. In 1981 (the same year Crockett moved his TV show tapings from Raleigh to Charlotte), former (and future) Georgia Championship Wrestling (GCW) booker Ole Anderson took over as Mid-Atlantic's booker. In 1981, Anderson booked both JCP and GCW simultaneously.
In 1982, Crockett partnered with wrestlers Ric Flair and Blackjack Mulligan to start a secondary company out of Knoxville, Tennessee: Southern Championship Wrestling. The promotion featured such stars as Mulligan; his son Barry Windham (then billed as Blackjack Mulligan Jr.); Kevin Sullivan; Wayne Ferris; The Mongolian Stomper; Terry Taylor; Tim Horner, and others. The enterprise lasted less than one year, however.
By the 1980s, the U.S. pro wrestling industry was undergoing seismic and rapid change. The old, NWA-sanctioned system of separate, regional "territory"-promotions was collapsing under increasing competitive pressure from Vincent K. McMahon's World Wrestling Federation (WWF) (later renamed WWE) -- itself a family-owned, territory promotion (covering the northeastern U.S.) -- which aggressively expanded into a nationwide promotion. Crockett had similar expansion goals, envisioning an NWA united through JCP buying-out or merging with all of its member regional territories.
Ted Turner had realized the value of professional wrestling for cable television in the early 1970s. This was a smart move for Turner, as pro wrestling provided his then-fledgling channel a source of cheap live entertainment, well-suited to TBS' target audience, at the time. Turner could run per inquiry ads (for products like Slim Whitman albums, Ginsu knives, etc.), and take part of the sales profits just by providing the big viewing audience delivered by pro wrestling's loyal fanbase (which generally did not attract big ad revenue at that time, due to negative industry perceptions of the lower-income target demographic). In 1982, Crockett ended his second year as NWA President. Turner's ("SuperStation") TBS had asked Georgia Championship Wrestling, Inc. to change its public brand name to World Championship Wrestling, helping fuel rumors that the Jim Barnett-controlled company would go national, itself. Georgia Championship Wrestling acquiesced to the World Championship Wrestling name change in 1982.
By 1983, JCP went from recording its weekly shows in a television studio, to shooting on-location, in between matches at live arena events. After purchasing a mobile television production unit for $1 million, Crockett unveiled what became the NWA's dominant, end-of-year, annual supercard: Starrcade.
In 1984, the WWF purchased a majority/controlling interest in Georgia Championship Wrestling from a number of its co-owners (including the Brisco brothers (Jack and Jerry) and Jim Barnett), thus gaining control of GCW's flagship, Saturday night timeslot on the nationally-seen TBS channel. This tactic -- co-opting the timeslots of rival territories in their own "backyard"/local TV markets, -- was a part of the WWF's national expansion strategy. To Vince McMahon's surprise, this tactic backfired severely with TBS. Viewer backlash was intense, as the Southern viewership was incensed to see the beloved stars of their local show suddenly replaced -- without advance notice -- by an "invading force" (a la, the U.S. Civil War) of wrestlers from "up North". TBS received so many complaints about the switch, that to appease local viewers, TBS granted an upstart promotion (backed by holdout GCW shareholder and NWA member Fred Ward, and former GCW wrestler/booker Ole Anderson) an early-Saturday morning time slot so that the local stars could still be seen there. This upstart company (and its television show) was called Championship Wrestling from Georgia. This program, along with Bill Watts's Mid-South Wrestling, easily surpassed the ratings for the WWF broadcast (which just featured clips and wrestler promos, not new matches). The steep decline in ratings for the Saturday evening timeslot, and viewership clamoring for GCW's return, began to make the WWF's move a money-losing one. Eventually, McMahon cut his losses and sold the timeslot to Crockett for $1 million. This chain of events and McMahon's refusal to sell to the network/Turner, instead, were critical in Turner's later decision to purchase Jim Crockett Promotions, and form the WCW promotion in its wake.
An extra sense of urgency was added to Crockett's national expansion ambitions when, after Frank Tunney's death, his Toronto promotion joined forces with the WWF. If Crockett wanted to run shows outside the Mid-Atlantic states now, he would have to either find other willing partner-promoters, or buy them out. This period also marked Crockett's first attempt to create a national federation; Crockett and other wrestling companies needed this opportunity after the WWF buyout of the Toronto territory occurred, as well as after the WWF program The War to Settle the Score aired on MTV to high ratings. Together with Verne Gagne's American Wrestling Association (AWA), Championship Wrestling from Georgia, and Memphis-based Jarrett Promotions, Jim Crockett Promotions would create Pro Wrestling USA. However, the organization fell apart in January 1986.


=== NWA unification ===
Crockett bought out Ole Anderson's Championship Wrestling from Georgia, on April 6, 1985, and was re-elected NWA President. This was to help counter the WWF, after it became America's dominant wrestling business in the wake of the first WrestleMania. Crockett then purchased both Saturday evening TBS timeslots from Vince McMahon (who needed extra money to launch Saturday Night's Main Event on NBC), thus making Crockett the outright owner of World Championship Wrestling. Crockett filled the timeslot with two hours of original programming filmed in Ted Turner's Atlanta studios. The programming aired under the World Championship Wrestling banner, which had been adopted by GCW before its demise. As a result of the success World Championship Wrestling now had from acquiring the Saturday night time slots, Crockett (along with JCP booker Dusty Rhodes) was able to establish the annual summer supercard, "The Great American Bash".
By 1987, Crockett was elected to a third term as NWA President, and gained control (either through purchase or working agreements) of the St. Louis Wrestling Club, Heart of America Sports Attractions (Bob Geigel's Central States brand), Championship Wrestling from Florida, and Bill Watts's Mid-South Sports (which operated under the Mid-South Wrestling, and later, upon expansion, Universal Wrestling Federation brand names). Despite Crockett having six consolidated territories under his banner and leading the NWA, JCP and the NWA were two separate entities, and Crockett -- like all NWA promoters before him and since -- was simply licensing the NWA brand name (whose true value was as a credibility-infusing, fan-trusted brand name for wrestling championships). This, despite the fact that during his reign, Crockett had an iron-clad grip on the NWA World Heavyweight Championship: by this point, JCP's top contracted performer, Ric Flair, was locked-in as the champion; even though he was obligated to perform title-defense matches in each territory against its own chosen star/challenger, any title changes occurred between only other performers also under contract to Crockett (e.g. Dusty Rhodes, Ronnie Garvin, etc.).
Crockett's rapid expansion had significant financial consequences for JCP. JCP expanded operations, and by December, had bought-out upstart rival the UWF; Crockett even moved many of his administrative employees from the Charlotte base, to Watts's former headquarters in Dallas. Jim Crockett Jr. and Dusty Rhodes personally manned the Dallas office, leaving David Crockett in charge of the Charlotte branch. Bob Geigel, a former NWA President who bought his promotion back from Crockett in February 1987 through a partnership, had also withdrawn from the NWA. JCP began to run shows in new markets from coast-to-coast (often in less-than-sold-out arenas), greatly increasing travel costs and other overhead. JCP's first pay-per-view endeavor, 1987's Starrcade, was scheduled in its traditional Thanksgiving slot, but ran into unexpected competition from the WWF's inaugural Survivor Series PPV, which was scheduled to air the same night. Not wanting to possibly lose to the WWF in a direct PPV competition, Crockett decided to move Starrcade's starting time to Thanksgiving afternoon, not evening. However, the WWF threatened cable companies that if they chose to air Starrcade, at all, the WWF would not offer them any future PPVs -- including that year's Survivor Series, and, next year's WrestleMania IV. At the time, the WWF was the uncontested #1 PPV content provider in America; so, only a handful of companies committed to JCP, devastating Starrcade '87's profitability.
A similar incident occurred in January 1988, when the WWF scheduled the first Royal Rumble special on the USA Network (i.e., basic cable) to air directly against JCP's Bunkhouse Stampede (on pay-per-view); once again, the WWF had succeeded in cutting into the buyrate of a JCP pay-per-view show. As a result, Crockett aired the first ever Clash of the Champions -- featuring a PPV-quality card -- on "free TV"/basic cable, March 27, 1988 on TBS, in an attempt to draw viewers away from WrestleMania IV, which took place that same night. This was one of the few tactics to actually work for JCP in its war with the WWF, as WrestleMania IV's buyrate was much lower than the prior year's Survivor Series' had been. However, Clash of the Champions was now the only thing Crockett could use to keep the NWA alive, though it was not even as highly watched as the WWF's Saturday Night's Main Event. On the verge of bankruptcy, Crockett sold Jim Crockett Promotions to Ted Turner in November 1988, and the promotion was formally renamed World Championship Wrestling (WCW).


=== Sale to Turner Broadcasting System ===
The eventual downfall of JCP, leading up to its eventual sale to Ted Turner (and the birth of WCW) can be attributed to several key factors. Magnum T.A.  one of JCP's top babyfaces, and the performer scheduled to become NWA World Heavyweight Champion at Starrcade 1986  was severely injured in a car accident over 2 months before Starrcade (October 14), and could never wrestle again. So, JCP turned major "heel" Nikita Koloff, into a face on October 25, to take Magnum T.A.'s place while still being able to have a profitable build-up to Starrcade's main event. JCP alienated loyal fans in the Carolinas by moving Starrcade '87 and the Bunkhouse Stampede to arenas in Chicago and New York City, respectively. JCP had no real history and market presence in either of these non-southern metro areas, and its ability to drawing sellout crowds for arena shows in the Southeast eventually suffered, as some local fans vindictively withheld their support.
Booking decisions also factored into the promotion's downfall. JCP flushed away a potentially profitable angle following the acquisition of Bill Watts's UWF, by "burying" the UWF's talent by  instead of portraying them as competitive with  JCP wrestlers and treating the UWF's championships as second-rate to the NWA titles promoted by JCP. Meanwhile, mid-carder Ron Garvin beat perennial champion Ric Flair for the NWA world title. Although Garvin was booked to be a babyface, fans did not find Garvin credible enough challenger to be a serious threat to Flair.
JCP apparently neglected to monitor its own lavish spending as well. Crockett flew himself and his top performers around in an expensive private jet. In addition to the expense of Crockett's personal jet, there were other extravagant purchases such as the limousines provided for various wrestlers and regular business parties held by officials throughout JCP's regional offices. In addition, the large amount of capital needed to take a wrestling federation on a national tour and Crockett's aggressive territorial acquisitions had seriously drained JCP's coffers. (In purchasing the UWF, JCP also took responsibility for the UWF's large debt from TV contracts, etc.)
Compounding the issues that came with expansion was a lack of investing in the kind of marketing needed to make it successful. As mentioned, major cards such as Starrcade and the Bunkhouse Stampede did not draw as well when moved out of JCP's traditional territory. According to Dusty Rhodes, JCP failed to gain the national name recognition that McMahon achieved with the World Wrestling Federation. Rhodes also pointed out that with the WWF's success, McMahon was financially able to lure the top talent away from rival companies. Because of this, JCP offered many of its stars lucrative contracts - paying them beyond their actual value - to prevent them from leaving the company.
Another factor was the fans' exasperation with the "Dusty Finish" (a type of "screwjob" finish named after Rhodes, who did not actually invent the concept, but used it frequently for matches at regular house shows and PPV/major cards, alike). Due the heavy overuse of this uncreative and predictable end-of-match sequence, JCP fans started to expect the swerve at any moment, whenever a popular wrestler (usually a face) appeared to win a title match and was about to be awarded the championship belt (or any similar situation), only to have the win overturned due to a technicality. As a result, attendance at live shows began to fall  even at venues where JCP had traditionally drawn well or extremely well.
By 1988, JCP was on the verge of bankruptcy. In November 1988, Turner Broadcasting System purchased a majority interest in JCP for $9 million. The Crockett family retained a minority interest, with Crockett, Jr. becoming a consultant. Turner Broadcasting System ultimately rebranded the promotion World Championship Wrestling.


== Championships ==
NWA Mid-Atlantic Heavyweight Championship
NWA Mid-Atlantic Tag Team Championship
NWA Mid-Atlantic Television Championship
NWA National Heavyweight Championship
NWA National Tag Team Championship
NWA United States Heavyweight Championship (Mid-Atlantic version)
NWA United States Tag Team Championship (Mid-Atlantic Version)
NWA United States Women's Championship
NWA Western States Heritage Championship
NWA World Heavyweight Championship
NWA World Junior Heavyweight Championship
NWA World Six-Man Tag Team Championship
NWA World Tag Team Championship (Mid-Atlantic version)
NWA World Television Championship
NWA World Women's Championship


== See also ==
Jim Crockett
Jim Crockett, Jr.
List of Jim Crockett Promotions alumni
List of NWA World Heavyweight Champions
World Championship Wrestling


== References ==


== External links ==
Wrestling-Titles.com: Jim Crockett Promotions
Wrestling-Titles.com: N.W.A. Mid-Atlantic Championship Wrestling
The Mid-Atlantic Getaway
The Mid-Atlantic Championship WrestlingA business plan is a formal statement of business goals, reasons they are attainable, and plans for reaching them. It may also contain background information about the organization or team attempting to reach those goals.
Business plans may target changes in perception and branding by the customer, client, taxpayer, or larger community. When the existing business is to assume a major change or when planning a new venture, a 3 to 5 year business plan is required, since investors will look for their investment return in that timeframe.
Perception
Perception is the process by which a person selects, organises, and interprets stimuli to create a meaningful picture of the world.


== Audience ==
Business plans may be internally or externally focused. Externally focused plans target goals that are important to external stakeholders, particularly financial stakeholders. They typically have detailed information about the organization or team attempting to reach the goals. With for-profit entities, external stakeholders include investors and customers. External stake-holders of non-profits include donors and the clients of the non-profit's services. For government agencies, external stakeholders include tax-payers, higher-level government agencies, and international lending bodies such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, various economic agencies of the United Nations, and development banks.
Internally focused business plans target intermediate goals required to reach the external goals. They may cover the development of a new product, a new service, a new IT system, a restructuring of finance, the refurbishing of a factory or a restructuring of the organization. An internal business plan is often developed in conjunction with a balanced scorecard or a list of critical success factors. This allows success of the plan to be measured using non-financial measures. Business plans that identify and target internal goals, but provide only general guidance on how they will be met are called strategic plans.
Operational plans describe the goals of an internal organization, working group or department. Project plans, sometimes known as project frameworks, describe the goals of a particular project. They may also address the project's place within the organization's larger strategic goals.


== Content ==
Business plans are decision-making tools. The content and format of the business plan is determined by the goals and audience. For example, a business plan for a non-profit might discuss the fit between the business plan and the organizations mission. Banks are quite concerned about defaults, so a business plan for a bank loan will build a convincing case for the organizations ability to repay the loan. Venture capitalists are primarily concerned about initial investment, feasibility, and exit valuation. A business plan for a project requiring equity financing will need to explain why current resources, upcoming growth opportunities, and sustainable competitive advantage will lead to a high exit valuation.
Preparing a business plan draws on a wide range of knowledge from many different business disciplines: finance, human resource management, intellectual property management, supply chain management, operations management, and marketing, among others. It can be helpful to view the business plan as a collection of sub-plans, one for each of the main business disciplines.
"... a good business plan can help to make a good business credible, understandable, and attractive to someone who is unfamiliar with the business. Writing a good business plan cant guarantee success, but it can go a long way toward reducing the odds of failure." 


== Presentation ==
The format of a business plan depends on its presentation context. It is common for businesses, especially start-ups, to have three or four formats for the same business plan.
An "elevator pitch" is a short summary of the plan's executive summary. This is often used as a teaser to awaken the interest of potential investors, customers, or strategic partners.
A pitch deck is a slide show and oral presentation that is meant to trigger discussion and interest potential investors in reading the written presentation. The content of the presentation is usually limited to the executive summary and a few key graphs showing financial trends and key decision making benchmarks. If a new product is being proposed and time permits, a demonstration of the product may be included.
A written presentation for external stakeholders is a detailed, well written, and pleasingly formatted plan targeted at external stakeholders.
An internal operational plan is a detailed plan describing planning details that are needed by management but may not be of interest to external stakeholders. Such plans have a somewhat higher degree of candor and informality than the version targeted at external stakeholders and others.
Typical structure for a business plan for a start up venture 
cover page and table of contents
executive summary
mission statement
business description
business environment analysis
SWOT analysis
industry background
competitor analysis
market analysis
marketing plan
operations plan
management summary
financial plan
attachments and milestones
Typical questions addressed by a business plan for a start up venture 
What problem does the company's product or service solve? What niche will it fill?
What is the company's solution to the problem?
Who are the company's customers, and how will the company market and sell its products to them?
What is the size of the market for this solution?
What is the business model for the business (how will it make money)?
Who are the competitors and how will the company maintain a competitive advantage?
How does the company plan to manage its operations as it grows?
Who will run the company and what makes them qualified to do so?
What are the risks and threats confronting the business, and what can be done to mitigate them?
What are the company's capital and resource requirements?
What are the company's historical and projected financial statements?


== Revising the business plan ==


=== Cost overruns and revenue shortfalls ===
Cost and revenue estimates are central to any business plan for deciding the viability of the planned venture. But costs are often underestimated and revenues overestimated resulting in later cost overruns, revenue shortfalls, and possibly non-viability. During the dot-com bubble 1997-2001 this was a problem for many technology start-ups. Reference class forecasting has been developed to reduce the risks of cost overruns and revenue shortfalls and thus generate more accurate business plans.


== Legal and liability issues ==


=== Disclosure requirements ===
An externally targeted business plan should list all legal concerns and financial liabilities that might negatively affect investors. Depending on the amount of funds being raised and the audience to whom the plan is presented, failure to do this may have severe legal consequences.


=== Limitations on content and audience ===
Non disclosure agreements (NDAs) with third parties, non-compete agreements, conflicts of interest, privacy concerns, and the protection of one's trade secrets may severely limit the audience to which one might show the business plan. Alternatively, they may require each party receiving the business plan to sign a contract accepting special clauses and conditions.
This situation is complicated by the fact that many venture capitalists will refuse to sign an NDA before looking at a business plan, lest it put them in the untenable position of looking at two independently developed look-alike business plans, both claiming originality. In such situations one may need to develop two versions of the business plan: a stripped down plan that can be used to develop a relationship and a detail plan that is only shown when investors have sufficient interest and trust to sign an NDA.


== Open business plans ==
Traditionally business plans have been highly confidential and quite limited in audience. The business plan itself is generally regarded as secret.
An open business plan is a business plan with unlimited audience. The business plan is typically web published and made available to all.
In the free software and open source business model, trade secrets, copyright and patents can no longer be used as effective locking mechanisms to provide sustainable advantages to a particular business and therefore a secret business plan is less relevant in those models.


== Uses ==
Education
Business plans are used in some primary and secondary programs to teach economic principles.

Wikiversity has a Lunar Boom Town project where students of all ages can collaborate with designing and revising business models and practice evaluating them to learn practical business planning techniques and methodology

Fundraising
Fundraising is the primary purpose for many business plans, since they are related to the inherent probable success/failure of the company risk.

Angel investors
Business loans
Grants
Startup company funding
Venture capital

Internal use

Management by objectives (MBO) is a process of agreeing upon objectives (as can be detailed within business plans) within an organization so that management and employees agree to the objectives and understand what they are in the organization.
Strategic planning is an organization's process of defining its strategy, or direction, and making decisions on allocating its resources to pursue this strategy, including its capital and people. Business plans can help decision makers see how specific projects relate to the organization's strategic plan.
Total quality management (TQM) is a business management strategy aimed at embedding awareness of quality in all organizational processes. TQM has been widely used in manufacturing, education, call centers, government, and service industries, as well as NASA space and science programs.


== Not for profit businesses ==
The business goals may be defined both for non-profit or for-profit organizations. For-profit business plans typically focus on financial goals, such as profit or creation of wealth. Non-profit, as well as government agency business plans tend to focus on the "organizational mission" which is the basis for their governmental status or their non-profit, tax-exempt status, respectivelyalthough non-profits may also focus on optimizing revenue.
The primary difference between profit and non-profit organizations is that "for-profit" organizations look to maximize wealth versus non-profit organizations, which look to provide a greater good to society. In non-profit organizations, creative tensions may develop in the effort to balance mission with "margin" (or revenue).


== Satires ==
The business plan is the subject of many satires. Satires are used both to express cynicism about business plans and as an educational tool to improve the quality of business plans. For example,
In his presentation, Five Criteria For a Successful Business Plan in Biotech, Dr. Roger Bernier, uses Dilbert comic strips to remind people what not to do when researching and writing a business plan for a biotech start-up.
Selena Maranjian's "Fool on the Hill" article in the The Motley Fool, "'South Park's' Investing Lesson" (November 8, 2001), references the "Underpants Gnomes" to illustrate the fallacy of focusing on goals without a clear implementation strategy. That "Gnomes" episode satirizes the business plans of the Dot-com era.


== See also ==


== References ==Dell Inc. (stylized as DELL) was an American privately owned multinational computer technology company based in Round Rock, Texas, United States, that developed, sold, repaired, and supported computers and related products and services. Eponymously named after its founder, Michael Dell, the company was one of the largest technological corporations in the world, employing more than 103,300 people worldwide.
Dell sold personal computers (PCs), servers, data storage devices, network switches, software, computer peripherals, HDTVs, cameras, printers, MP3 players, and electronics built by other manufacturers. The company was well known for its innovations in supply chain management and electronic commerce, particularly its direct-sales model and its "build-to-order" or "configure to order" approach to manufacturingdelivering individual PCs configured to customer specifications. Dell was a pure hardware vendor for much of its existence, but with the acquisition in 2009 of Perot Systems, Dell entered the market for IT services. The company has since made additional acquisitions in storage and networking systems, with the aim of expanding their portfolio from offering computers only to delivering complete solutions for enterprise customers.
Dell was listed at number 51 in the Fortune 500 list, until 2014. After going private in 2013, the newly confidential nature of its financial information prevents the company from being ranked by Fortune. In 2015, it was the third largest PC vendor in the world after Lenovo and HP. Dell is currently the #1 shipper of PC monitors in the world. Dell is the sixth largest company in Texas by total revenue, according to Fortune magazine. It is the second largest non-oil company in Texas  behind AT&T  and the largest company in the Greater Austin area. It was a publicly traded company (NASDAQ: DELL), as well as a component of the NASDAQ-100 and S&P 500, until it was taken private in a leveraged buyout which closed on October 30, 2013.
On September 7, 2016, Dell Inc. acquired EMC Corporation to form Dell Technologies, restructuring the original company as a subsidiary of Dell Technologies.


== History ==

Michael Dell founded PC's Limited while a student of the University of Texas at Austin. The dorm-room headquartered company sold IBM PC-compatible computers built from stock components. Dell dropped out of school to focus full-time on his fledgling business, after getting $1,000 in expansion-capital from his family. In 1985, the company produced the first computer of its own design, the Turbo PC, which sold for $795. Dell appeared in PC's Limited advertisements in national magazines, asking readers to "give us a chance to show you what [its products] can do". Selling directly to consumers custom-assembled computers according to a selection of options, the company grossed more than $73 million in its first year of operation.
In 1986, Michael Dell brought in Lee Walker, a 51-year-old venture capitalist, as president and chief operating officer, to serve as mentor and to implement Dell's ideas for growing the company. Walker was also instrumental in recruiting members to the board of directors when the company went public in 1988. Walker retired in 1990 due to ill health, and Michael Dell hired Morton Meyerson, former CEO and president of Electronic Data Systems to transform the company from a fast-growing medium-sized firm into a billion-dollar enterprise.
The company dropped the PCs Limited name in 1987 to become Dell Computer Corporation and began expanding globally. In June 1988, Dell's market capitalization grew by $30 million to $80 million from its June 22 initial public offering of 3.5 million shares at $8.50 a share. In 1992, Fortune magazine included Dell Computer Corporation in its list of the world's 500 largest companies, making Michael Dell the youngest CEO of a Fortune 500 company ever.
In 1993, to complement its own direct sales channel, Dell planned to sell PCs at big-box retail outlets such as Wal-Mart, which would have brought in an additional $125 million in annual revenue. Bain consultant Kevin Rollins persuaded Michael Dell to pull out of these deals, believing they would be money losers in the long run. Margins at retail were thin at best and Dell left the reseller channel in 1994. Rollins would soon join Dell full-time and eventually become the company President and CEO.


=== Growth in the 1990s and early 2000s ===
Originally, Dell did not emphasize the consumer market, due to the higher costs and unacceptably low profit margins in selling to individuals and households; this changed when the companys Internet site took off in 1996 and 1997. While the industrys average selling price to individuals was going down, Dell's was going up, as second- and third-time computer buyers who wanted powerful computers with multiple features and did not need much technical support were choosing Dell. Dell found an opportunity among PC-savvy individuals who liked the convenience of buying direct, customizing their PC to their means, and having it delivered in days. In early 1997, Dell created an internal sales and marketing group dedicated to serving the home market and introduced a product line designed especially for individual users.
From 1997 to 2004, Dell enjoyed steady growth and it gained market share from competitors even during industry slumps. During the same period, rival PC vendors such as Compaq, Gateway, IBM, Packard Bell, and AST Research struggled and eventually left the market or were bought out. Dell surpassed Compaq to become the largest PC manufacturer in 1999. Operating costs made up only 10% of Dell's $35 billion in revenue in 2002, compared with 21% of revenue at Hewlett-Packard, 25% at Gateway, and 46% at Cisco. In 2002, when Compaq merged with Hewlett Packard (the fourth-place PC maker), the newly combined Hewlett Packard took the top spot but struggled and Dell soon regained its lead. Dell grew the fastest in the early 2000s.
In 1996, Dell began selling computers through its website. The company attained and maintained the number 1 rating in PC reliability and customer service/technical support, according to Consumer Reports, year after year, during the mid-to-late 90s through 2001 right before Windows XP was released.
In the mid-1990s, Dell expanded beyond desktop computers and laptops by selling servers, starting with low-end servers. The major three providers of servers at the time were IBM, Hewlett Packard, and Compaq, many of which were based on proprietary technology, such as IBM's Power4 microprocessors or various proprietary versions of the Unix operating system. Dell's new PowerEdge servers did not require a major investment in proprietary technologies, as they ran Microsoft Windows NT on Intel chips, and could be built more cheaply than its competitors. Consequently, Dell's enterprise revenues, almost nonexistent in 1994, accounted for 13% of the company's total intake by 1998. Three years later, Dell passed Compaq as the top provider of Intel-based servers, with 31% of the market. Dell's first acquisition occurred in 1999 with the purchase of ConvergeNet Technologies for $332 million, after Dell had failed to develop an enterprise storage system in-house; ConvergeNet's elegant but complex technology did not fit in with Dell's commodity-producer business model, forcing Dell to write down the entire value of the acquisition.
In 2002, Dell expanded its product line to include televisions, handhelds, digital audio players, and printers. Chairman and CEO Michael Dell had repeatedly blocked President and COO Kevin Rollins's attempt to lessen the company's heavy dependency on PCs, which Rollins wanted to fix by acquiring EMC Corporation.
In 2003, the company was rebranded as simply "Dell Inc." to recognize the company's expansion beyond computers.
In 2004, Michael Dell resigned as CEO while retaining the position of Chairman, handing the CEO title to Kevin Rollins, who had been President and COO since 2001. Despite no longer holding the CEO title, Dell essentially acted as a de facto co-CEO with Rollins.
Under Rollins, Dell began to loosen its ties to Microsoft and Intel, the two companies responsible for Dell's dominance in the PC business. During that time, Dell acquired Alienware, which introduced several new items to Dell products, including AMD microprocessors. To prevent cross-market products, Dell continues to run Alienware as a separate entity, but still a wholly owned subsidiary.


=== Disappointments ===
In 2005, while earnings and sales continued to rise, sales growth slowed considerably, and the company stock lost 25% of its value that year. By June 2006, the stock traded around $25 USD which was 40% down from July 2005the high-water mark of the company in the post-dotcom era.
The slowing sales growth has been attributed to the maturing PC market, which constituted 66% of Dell's sales, and analysts suggested that Dell needed to make inroads into non-PC businesses segments such as storage, services and servers. Dell's price advantage was tied to its ultra-lean manufacturing for desktop PCs, but this became less important as savings became harder to find inside the company's supply chain, and as competitors such as Hewlett-Packard and Acer made their PC manufacturing operations more efficient to match Dell, weakening Dell's traditional price differentiation. Throughout the entire PC industry, declines in prices along with commensurate increases in performance meant that Dell had fewer opportunities to upsell to their customers (a lucrative strategy of encouraging buyers to upgrade the processor or memory). As a result, the company was selling a greater proportion of inexpensive PCs than before, which eroded profit margins. The laptop segment had become the fastest-growing of the PC market, but Dell produced low-cost notebooks in China like other PC manufacturers which eliminated Dell's manufacturing cost advantages, plus Dell's reliance on Internet sales meant that it missed out on growing notebook sales in big box stores.[3] CNET has suggested that Dell was getting trapped in the increasing commoditization of high volume low margin computers, which prevented it from offering more exciting devices that consumers demanded.
Despite plans of expanding into other global regions and product segments, Dell was heavily dependent on U.S. corporate PC market, as desktop PCs sold to both commercial and corporate customers accounted for 32% of its revenue, 85% of its revenue comes from businesses, and 64% of its revenue came from North and South America, according to its 2006 third-quarter results. U.S. shipments of desktop PCs were shrinking, and the corporate PC market which purchases PCs in upgrade cycles had largely decided to take a break from buying new systems. The last cycle started around 2002, three or so years after companies started buying PCs ahead of the perceived Y2K problems, and corporate clients were not expected to upgrade again until extensive testing of Microsoft's Windows Vista (expected in early 2007), putting the next upgrade cycle around 2008. Heavily depending on PCs, Dell had to slash prices to boost sales volumes, while demanding deep cuts from suppliers.
Dell had long stuck by its direct sales model. Consumers had become the main drivers of PC sales in recent years, yet there had a decline in consumers purchasing PCs through the Web or on the phone, as increasing numbers were visiting consumer electronics retail stores to try out the devices first. Dell's rivals in the PC industry, HP, Gateway and Acer, had a long retail presence and so were well poised to take advantage of the consumer shift. The lack of a retail presence stymied Dell's attempts to offer consumer electronics such as flat-panel TVs and MP3 players. Dell responded by experimenting with mall kiosks, plus quasi-retail stores in Texas and New York.
Dell had a reputation as a company that relied upon supply chain efficiencies to sell established technologies at low prices, instead of being an innovator. By the mid-2000s many analysts were looking to innovating companies as the next source of growth in the technology sector. Dell's low spending on R&D relative to its revenue (compared to IBM, Hewlett Packard, and Apple Inc.)which worked well in the commoditized PC marketprevented it from making inroads into more lucrative segments, such as MP3 players and later mobile devices. Increasing spending on R&D would have cut into the operating margins that the company emphasized. Dell had done well with a horizontal organization that focused on PCs when the computing industry moved to horizontal mix-and-match layers in the 1980s, but by the mid-2000 the industry shifted to vertically integrated stacks to deliver complete IT solutions and Dell lagged far behind competitors like Hewlett Packard and Oracle.
Dell's reputation for poor customer service, since 2002, which was exacerbated as it moved call centres offshore and as its growth outstripped its technical support infrastructure, came under increasing scrutiny on the Web. The original Dell model was known for high customer satisfaction when PCs sold for thousands but by the 2000s, the company could not justify that level of service when computers in the same lineup sold for hundreds. Rollins responded by shifting Dick Hunter from head of manufacturing to head of customer service. Hunter, who noted that Dell's DNA of cost-cutting "got in the way," aimed to reduce call transfer times and have call center representatives resolve inquiries in one call. By 2006, Dell had spent $100 million in just a few months to improve on this, and rolled out DellConnect to answer customer inquiries more quickly. In July 2006, the company started its Direct2Dell blog, and then in February 2007, Michael Dell launched IdeaStorm.com, asking customers for advice including selling Linux computers and reducing the promotional "bloatware" on PCs. These initiatives did manage to cut the negative blog posts from 49% to 22%, as well as reduce the "Dell Hell" prominent on Internet search engines.
There was also criticism that Dell used faulty components for its PCs, particularly the 11.8 million OptiPlex desktop computers sold to businesses and governments from May 2003 to July 2005, that suffered from bad capacitors made by a company called Nichicon. A battery recall in August 2006, as a result of a Dell laptop catching fire caused much negative attention for the company though later, Sony was found responsible for the faulty batteries.
2006 marked the first year that Dell's growth was slower than the PC industry as a whole. By the fourth quarter of 2006, Dell lost its title of the largest PC manufacturer to rival Hewlett Packard whose Personal Systems Group was invigorated thanks to a restructuring initiated by their CEO Mark Hurd.
After four out of five quarterly earnings reports were below expectations, Rollins resigned as President and CEO on January 31, 2007 and founder Michael Dell assumed the role of CEO again.


=== Dell 2.0 and downsizing ===
Dell announced a change campaign called "Dell 2.0," reducing the number of employees and diversifying the company's products. While chairman of the board after relinquishing his CEO position, Michael Dell still had significant input in the company during Rollins' years as CEO. With the return of Michael Dell as CEO, the company saw immediate changes in operations, the exodus of many senior vice-presidents and new personnel brought in from outside the company. Michael Dell announced a number of initiatives and plans (part of the "Dell 2.0" initiative) to improve the company's financial performance. These include elimination of 2006 bonuses for employees with some discretionary awards, reduction in the number of managers reporting directly to Michael Dell from 20 to 12, and reduction of "bureaucracy". Jim Schneider retired as CFO and was replaced by Donald Carty, as the company came under an SEC probe for its accounting practices.
On April 23, 2008, Dell announced the closure of one of its biggest Canadian call-centers in Ottawa, Ontario, reducing staff by approximately 1,100 employees, with 500 of those redundancies effective on the spot, and with the official closure of the center scheduled for the summer. The call-center had opened in 2006 after the City of Ottawa won a bid to host it. Less than a year later, Dell planned to double its workforce to nearly 3,000 workers and add a new building. These plans were reversed, due to a high Canadian dollar that made the Ottawa staff relatively expensive, and also as part of Dell's turnaround, which involved moving these call-center jobs offshore to cut costs. The company had also announced the shutdown of its Edmonton, Alberta office, losing 900 jobs. In total, Dell announced the ending of about 8,800 jobs in 20072008  10% of its workforce.
By the late 2000s, Dell's "configure to order" approach of manufacturingdelivering individual PCs configured to customer specifications from its US facilities was no longer as efficient or competitive with high-volume Asian contract manufacturers as PCs became powerful low-cost commodities. Dell closed plants that produced desktop computers for the North American market, including the Mort Topfer Manufacturing Center in Austin, Texas (original location) and Lebanon, Tennessee (opened in 1999) in 2008 and early 2009, respectively. The desktop production plant in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, received US$280 million in incentives from the state and opened in 2005, but ceased operations in November 2010. Dell's contract with the state required them to repay the incentives for failing to meet the conditions, and they sold the North Carolina plant to Herbalife. Most of the work that used to take place in Dell's U.S. plants was transferred to contract manufacturers in Asia and Mexico, or some of Dell's own factories overseas. The Miami, Florida, facility of its Alienware subsidiary remains in operation, while Dell continues to produce its servers (its most profitable products) in Austin, Texas. On January 8, 2009, Dell announced the closure of its manufacturing plant in Limerick, Ireland, with the loss of 1,900 jobs and the transfer of production to its plant in od in Poland.
The release of Apple's iPad tablet computer had a negative impact on Dell and other major PC vendors, as consumers switched away from desktop and laptop PCs. Dell's own mobility division has not managed success with developing smartphones or tablets, whether running Windows or Google Android. The Dell Streak was a failure commercially and critically due to its outdated OS, numerous bugs, and low resolution screen. InfoWorld suggested that Dell and other OEMs saw tablets as a short-term, low-investment opportunity running Google Android, an approach that neglected user interface and failed to gain long term market traction with consumers. Dell has responded by pushing higher-end PCs, such as the XPS line of notebooks, which do not compete with the Apple iPad and Kindle Fire tablets. The growing popularity of smartphones and tablet computers instead of PCs drove Dell's consumer segment to an operating loss in Q3 2012. In December 2012, Dell suffered its first decline in holiday sales in five years, despite the introduction of Windows 8.
In the shrinking PC industry, Dell continued to lose market share, as it dropped below Lenovo in 2011 to fall to number three in the world. Dell and fellow American contemporary Hewlett Packard came under pressure from Asian PC manufacturers Lenovo, Asus, and Acer, all of which had lower production costs and willing to accept lower profit margins. In addition, while the Asian PC vendors had been improving their quality and design, for instance Lenovo's ThinkPad series was winning corporate customers away from Dell's laptops, Dell's customer service and reputation had been slipping. Dell remained the second-most profitable PC vendor, as it took 13% of operating profits in the PC industry during Q4 2012, behind Apple Inc.'s Macintosh that took 45%t, 7% at Hewlett Packard, 6% at Lenovo and Asus, and 1% for Acer.
Dell has been attempting to offset its declining PC business, which still accounted for half of its revenue and generates steady cash flow, by expanding into the enterprise market with servers, networking, software, and services. It avoided many of the acquisition writedowns and management turnover that plagued its chief rival Hewlett Packard. Dell also managed some success in taking advantage of its high-touch direct sales heritage to establish close relationships and design solutions for clients. Despite spending $13 billion on acquisitions to diversify its portfolio beyond hardware, the company was unable to convince the market that it could thrive or made the transformation in the post-PC world, as it suffered continued declines in revenue and share price. Dell's market share in the corporate segment was previously a "moat" against rivals but this has no longer been the case as sales and profits have fallen precipitously.


=== 2013 buyout ===
After several weeks of rumors, which started around January 11, 2013, Dell announced on February 5, 2013 that it had struck a $24.4 billion leveraged buyout deal, that would have delisted its shares from the NASDAQ and Hong Kong Stock Exchange and taken it private. Reuters reported that Michael Dell and Silver Lake Partners, aided by a $2 billion loan from Microsoft, would acquire the public shares at $13.65 apiece. The $24.4 billion buyout was projected to be the largest leveraged buyout backed by private equity since the 2007 financial crisis. It is also the largest technology buyout ever, surpassing the 2006 buyout of Freescale Semiconductor for $17.5 billion.
The founder of Dell, Michael Dell, said of the February offer "I believe this transaction will open an exciting new chapter for Dell, our customers and team members". Dell rival Lenovo reacted to the buyout, saying "the financial actions of some of our traditional competitors will not substantially change our outlook".
In March 2013, the Blackstone Group and Carl Icahn expressed interest in purchasing Dell. In April 2013, Blackstone withdrew their offer, citing deteriorating business. Other private equity firms such as KKR & Co. and TPG Capital declined to submit alternative bids for Dell, citing the uncertain market for personal computers and competitive pressures, so the "wide-open bidding war" never materialized. Analysts said that the biggest challenge facing Silver Lake would be to find an exit strategy to profit from its investment, which would be when the company would hold an IPO to go public again, and one warned But even if you can get a $25bn enterprise value for Dell, it will take years to get out.
In May 2013, Dell joined his board in voting for his offer. The following August he reached a deal with the special committee on the board for $13.88 (a raised price of $13.75 plus a special dividend of 13 cents per share), as well as a change to the voting rules. The $13.88 cash offer (plus a $.08 per share dividend for the third fiscal quarter) was accepted on September 12 and closed on October 30, 2013, ending Dell's 25-year run as a publicly traded company.
After the buyout the newly private Dell offered a Voluntary Separation Programme that they expected to reduce their workforce by up to 7%. The reception to the program so exceeded the expectations that it was speculated that Dell might be forced to hire new staff to make up for the losses.
On November 19, 2015, Dell, alongside ARM Holdings, Cisco Systems, Intel, Microsoft, and Princeton University, founded the OpenFog Consortium, to promote interests and development in fog computing.


=== 2016 merge and fate ===

On October 12, 2015, Dell announced its intent to acquire the enterprise software and storage company EMC Corporation. At $67 billion, it has been labeled the "highest-valued tech acquisition in history". The acquisition was finalized September 7, 2016 
The announcement came two years after Dell Inc. returned to private ownership, claiming that it faced bleak prospects and would need several years out of the public eye to rebuild its business. It's thought that the company's value has roughly doubled since then. EMC was being pressured by Elliott Management, a hedge fund holding 2.2% of EMC's stock, to reorganize their unusual "Federation" structure, in which EMC's divisions were effectively being run as independent companies. Elliott argued this structure deeply undervalued EMC's core "EMC II" data storage business, and that increasing competition between EMC II and VMware products was confusing the market and hindering both companies. The Wall Street Journal estimated that in 2014 Dell had revenue of $27.3 billion from personal computers and $8.9bn from servers, while EMC had $16.5bn from EMC II, $1bn from RSA Security, $6bn from VMware, and $230 million from Pivotal Software. EMC owns around 80% of the stock of VMware. The proposed acquisition will maintain VMware as a separate company, held via a new tracking stock, while the other parts of EMC will be rolled into Dell. Once the acquisition closes Dell will again publish quarterly financial results, having ceased these on going private in 2013.

The combined business is expected to address the markets for scale-out architecture, converged infrastructure and private cloud computing, playing to the strengths of both EMC and Dell. Commentators have questioned the deal, with FBR Capital Markets saying that though it makes a "ton of sense" for Dell, it's a "nightmare scenario that would lack strategic synergies" for EMC. Fortune said there was a lot for Dell to like in EMC's portfolio, but "does it all add up enough to justify tens of billions of dollars for the entire package? Probably not." The Register reported the view of William Blair & Company that the merger would "blow up the current IT chess board", forcing other IT infrastructure vendors to restructure to achieve scale and vertical integration. The value of VMware stock fell 10% after the announcement, valuing the deal at around $6364bn rather than the $67bn originally reported.
Key investors backing the deal besides Dell are Singapore's Temasek Holdings and Silver Lake Partners.
Dell's offer will remain open for 60 days during which EMC can seek other possible buyers, but this is believed to be unlikely: Hewlett-Packard (potentially a better fit for EMC) is preoccupied with its own split, and the deal has been welcomed by Elliott Management and EMC's chairman Joe Tucci.
On September 7, 2016, Dell Inc. completed its $60 billion deal to acquire EMC Corp., the largest technology merger in history.
The new company, Dell Technologies, employs about 140,000 people globally and will maintain operations in Hopkinton, Mass., where EMC was located. With $74 billion in revenue, Dell Technologies is the worlds largest privately controlled tech company.


== Acquisitions ==


== Dell facilities ==
Dell's headquarters are located in Round Rock, Texas. As of 2013 the company employed about 14,000 people in central Texas and was the region's largest private employer, which has 2,100,000 square feet (200,000 m2) of space. As of 1999 almost half of the general fund of the city of Round Rock originated from sales taxes generated from the Dell headquarters.
Dell previously had its headquarters in the Arboretum complex in northern Austin, Texas. In 1989 Dell occupied 127,000 square feet (11,800 m2) in the Arboretum complex. In 1990, Dell had 1,200 employees in its headquarters. In 1993, Dell submitted a document to Round Rock officials, titled "Dell Computer Corporate Headquarters, Round Rock, Texas, May 1993 Schematic Design." Despite the filing, during that year the company said that it was not going to move its headquarters. In 1994, Dell announced that it was moving most of its employees out of the Arboretum, but that it was going to continue to occupy the top floor of the Arboretum and that the company's official headquarters address would continue to be the Arboretum. The top floor continued to hold Dell's board room, demonstration center, and visitor meeting room. Less than one month prior to August 29, 1994, Dell moved 1,100 customer support and telephone sales employees to Round Rock. Dell's lease in the Arboretum had been scheduled to expire in 1994.

By 1996, Dell was moving its headquarters to Round Rock. As of January 1996 3,500 people still worked at the current Dell headquarters. One building of the Round Rock headquarters, Round Rock 3, had space for 6,400 employees and was scheduled to be completed in November 1996. In 1998 Dell announced that it was going to add two buildings to its Round Rock complex, adding 1,600,000 square feet (150,000 m2) of office space to the complex.
In 2000, Dell announced that it would lease 80,000 square feet (7,400 m2) of space in the Las Cimas office complex in unincorporated Travis County, Texas, between Austin and West Lake Hills, to house the company's executive offices and corporate headquarters. 100 senior executives were scheduled to work in the building by the end of 2000. In January 2001, the company leased the space in Las Cimas 2, located along Loop 360. Las Cimas 2 housed Dell's executives, the investment operations, and some corporate functions. Dell also had an option for 138,000 square feet (12,800 m2) of space in Las Cimas 3. After a slowdown in business required reducing employees and production capacity, Dell decided to sublease its offices in two buildings in the Las Cimas office complex. In 2002 Dell announced that it planned to sublease its space to another tenant; the company planned to move its headquarters back to Round Rock once a tenant was secured. By 2003, Dell moved its headquarters back to Round Rock. It leased all of Las Cimas I and II, with a total of 312,000 square feet (29,000 m2), for about a seven-year period after 2003. By that year roughly 100,000 square feet (9,300 m2) of that space was absorbed by new subtenants.
In 2008, Dell switched the power sources of the Round Rock headquarters to more environmentally friendly ones, with 60% of the total power coming from TXU Energy wind farms and 40% coming from the Austin Community Landfill gas-to-energy plant operated by Waste Management, Inc.
Dell facilities in the United States are located in Austin, Texas; Plano, Texas; Nashua, New Hampshire; Nashville, Tennessee; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Peoria, Illinois; Hillsboro, Oregon (Portland area); Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Eden Prairie, Minnesota (Dell Compellent); Bowling Green, Kentucky; Lincoln, Nebraska; and Miami, Florida. Facilities located abroad include Penang, Malaysia; Xiamen, China; Bracknell, UK; Manila, Philippines Chennai, India; Hyderabad, India; Noida, India; Hortolandia and Porto Alegre, Brazil; Bratislava, Slovakia; d, Poland; Panama City, Panama; Dublin and Limerick, Ireland; and Casablanca, Morocco.
The US and India are the only countries that have all Dell's business functions and provide support globally: research and development, manufacturing, finance, analysis, and customer care.


=== Manufacturing ===
From its early beginnings, Dell operated as a pioneer in the "configure to order" approach to manufacturingdelivering individual PCs configured to customer specifications. In contrast, most PC manufacturers in those times delivered large orders to intermediaries on a quarterly basis.
To minimize the delay between purchase and delivery, Dell has a general policy of manufacturing its products close to its customers. This also allows for implementing a just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing approach, which minimizes inventory costs. Low inventory is another signature of the Dell business modela critical consideration in an industry where components depreciate very rapidly.
Dell's manufacturing process covers assembly, software installation, functional testing (including "burn-in"), and quality control. Throughout most of the company's history, Dell manufactured desktop machines in-house and contracted out manufacturing of base notebooks for configuration in-house. The company's approach has changed, as cited in the 2006 Annual Report, which states, "We are continuing to expand our use of original design manufacturing partnerships and manufacturing outsourcing relationships." The Wall Street Journal reported in September 2008 that "Dell has approached contract computer manufacturers with offers to sell" their plants. By the late 2000s, Dell's "configure to order" approach of manufacturingdelivering individual PCs configured to customer specifications from its US facilities was no longer as efficient or competitive with high-volume Asian contract manufacturers as PCs became powerful low-cost commodities.
Assembly of desktop computers for the North American market formerly took place at Dell plants in Austin, Texas (original location) and Lebanon, Tennessee (opened in 1999), which have been closed in 2008 and early 2009, respectively. The plant in Winston-Salem, North Carolina received $280 million USD in incentives from the state and opened in 2005, but ceased operations in November 2010, and Dell's contract with the state requires them to repay the incentives for failing to meet the conditions. Most of the work that used to take place in Dell's U.S. plants was transferred to contract manufacturers in Asia and Mexico, or some of Dell's own factories overseas. The Miami, Florida facility of its Alienware subsidiary remains in operation.
Dell assembled computers for the EMEA market at the Limerick facility in the Republic of Ireland, and once employed about 4,500 people in that country. Dell began manufacturing in Limerick in 1991 and went on to become Ireland's largest exporter of goods and its second-largest company and foreign investor. On January 8, 2009, Dell announced that it would move all Dell manufacturing in Limerick to Dell's new plant in the Polish city of d by January 2010. European Union officials said they would investigate a 52.7million aid package the Polish government used to attract Dell away from Ireland. European Manufacturing Facility 1 (EMF1, opened in 1990) and EMF3 form part of the Raheen Industrial Estate near Limerick. EMF2 (previously a Wang facility, later occupied by Flextronics, situated in Castletroy) closed in 2002, and Dell Inc. has consolidated production into EMF3 (EMF1 now contains only offices). Subsidies from the Polish government did keep Dell for a long time. After ending assembly in the Limerick plant the Cherrywood Technology Campus in Dublin was the largest Dell office in the republic with over 1200 people in sales (mainly UK & Ireland), support (enterprise support for EMEA) and research and development for cloud computing, but no more manufacturing except Dell's Alienware subsidiary, which manufactures PCs in an Athlone, Ireland plant. Whether this facility will remain in Ireland is not certain. Construction of EMF4 in d, Poland has started: Dell started production there in autumn 2007.
Dell opened plants in Penang, Malaysia in 1995, and in Xiamen, China in 1999. These facilities serve the Asian market and assemble 95% of Dell notebooks. Dell Inc. has invested an estimated $60 million in a new manufacturing unit in Chennai, India, to support the sales of its products in the Indian subcontinent. Indian-made products bear the "Made in India" mark. In 2007 the Chennai facility had the target of producing 400,000 desktop PCs, and plans envisaged it starting to produce notebook PCs and other products in the second half of 2007.
Dell moved desktop and PowerEdge server manufacturing for the South American market from the Eldorado do Sul plant opened in 1999, to a new plant in Hortolandia, Brazil in 2007.


== Products ==


=== Scope and brands ===

The corporation markets specific brand names to different market segments.
Its Business/Corporate class represent brands where the company advertising emphasizes long life-cycles, reliability, and serviceability. Such brands include:
OptiPlex (office desktop computer systems)
Dimension (home desktop computer systems)
Vostro (office/small business desktop and notebook systems)
n Series (desktop and notebook computers shipped with Linux or FreeDOS installed)
Latitude (business-focused notebooks)
Precision (workstation systems and high-performance notebooks),
PowerEdge (business servers)
PowerVault (direct-attach and network-attached storage)
Force10 (network switches)
PowerConnect (network switches)
Dell Compellent (storage area networks)
EqualLogic (enterprise class iSCSI SANs)
Dell EMR (electronic medical records)
Dell's Home Office/Consumer class emphasizes value, performance, and expandability. These brands include:
Inspiron (budget desktop and notebook computers)
XPS (high-end desktop and notebook computers)
Alienware (high-performance gaming systems)
Venue (Tablets Android / Windows)
Dell's Peripherals class includes USB keydrives, LCD televisions, and printers; Dell monitors includes LCD TVs, plasma TVs and projectors for HDTV and monitors. Dell UltraSharp is further a high-end brand of monitors.
Dell service and support brands include the Dell Solution Station (extended domestic support services, previously "Dell on Call"), Dell Support Center (extended support services abroad), Dell Business Support (a commercial service-contract that provides an industry-certified technician with a lower call-volume than in normal queues), Dell Everdream Desktop Management ("Software as a Service" remote-desktop management, originally a SaaS company founded by Elon Musk's cousin, Lyndon Rive, which Dell bought in 2007), and Your Tech Team (a support-queue available to home users who purchased their systems either through Dell's website or through Dell phone-centers).
Discontinued products and brands include Axim (PDA; discontinued April 9, 2007), Dimension (home and small office desktop computers; discontinued July 2007), Dell Digital Jukebox (MP3 player; discontinued August 2006), Dell PowerApp (application-based servers), and Dell Optiplex (desktop and tower computers previously supported to run server and desktop operating systems).


=== Technical support ===
Dell routes technical support queries on products for the professional market according to component-type and to the level of support purchased:
Basic support provides business-hours telephone support and next business-day on-site support/ Return-to-Base, or Collect and Return Services (based on contracts purchased at point of sale)
Dell ProSupport provides 24x7x365 telephone and online support, a selection of 4 or 6-hour onsite support after telephone-based troubleshooting, and a Mission Critical option with two-hour onsite support, for customers who choose the highest level of support for their most critical hardware assets.
In addition, the company provides protection services, advisory services, multivendor hardware support, "how-to" support for software applications, collaborative support with many third-party vendors, and online parts and labor dispatching for customers who diagnose and troubleshoot their hardware. Dell also provides Dell ProSupport customers access to a crisis-center to handle major outages, or problems caused by natural disasters. Dell also provide on-line support by using the computer's service-tag that provides full list of the hardware elements installed originally, purchase date and provides the latest upgrades for the original hardware drivers.
Dell's Consumer division has 24x7 phone based and online troubleshooting in the United States and Canada. In 2008, Dell redesigned services-and-support for businesses with "Dell ProSupport", offering customers more options to adapt services to fit their needs.


== Security ==


=== Self-signed root certificate ===
In November 2015 it emerged that several Dell computers had shipped with an identical pre-installed root certificate known as "eDellRoot". This raised such security risks as attackers impersonating HTTPS-protected websites such as Google and Bank of America and malware being signed with the certificate to bypass Microsoft software filtering. Dell apologised and offered a removal tool.


=== Dell Foundation Services ===
Also in November 2015, a researcher discovered that customers with diagnostic program Dell Foundation Services could be digitally tracked using the unique service tag number assigned to them by the program. This was possible even if a customer enabled private browsing and deleted their browser cookies. Ars Technica recommended that Dell customers uninstall the program until the issue was addressed.


== Commercial aspects ==


=== Organization ===
The board consists of nine directors. Michael Dell, the founder of the company, serves as chairman of the board and chief executive officer. Other board members include Don Carty, Judy Lewent, Klaus Luft, Alex Mandl, and Sam Nunn. Shareholders elect the nine board members at meetings, and those board members who do not get a majority of votes must submit a resignation to the board, which will subsequently choose whether or not to accept the resignation. The board of directors usually sets up five committees having oversight over specific matters. These committees include the Audit Committee, which handles accounting issues, including auditing and reporting; the Compensation Committee, which approves compensation for the CEO and other employees of the company; the Finance Committee, which handles financial matters such as proposed mergers and acquisitions; the Governance and Nominating Committee, which handles various corporate matters (including nomination of the board); and the Antitrust Compliance Committee, which attempts to prevent company practices from violating antitrust laws.
Day-to-day operations of the company are run by the Global Executive Management Committee, which sets strategic direction. Dell has regional senior vice-presidents for countries other than the United States, including David Marmonti for EMEA and Stephen J. Felice for Asia/Japan. As of 2007, other officers included Martin Garvin (senior vice president for worldwide procurement) and Susan Sheskey (vice president and Chief Information Officer).


=== Marketing ===
Dell advertisements have appeared in several types of media including television, the Internet, magazines, catalogs and newspapers. Some of Dell Inc's marketing strategies include lowering prices at all times of the year, free bonus products (such as Dell printers), and free shipping to encourage more sales and stave off competitors. In 2006, Dell cut its prices in an effort to maintain its 19.2% market share. This also cut profit-margins by more than half, from 8.7 to 4.3 percent. To maintain its low prices, Dell continues to accept most purchases of its products via the Internet and through the telephone network, and to move its customer-care division to India and El Salvador.
A popular United States television and print ad campaign in the early 2000s featured the actor Ben Curtis playing the part of "Steven", a lightly mischievous blond-haired youth who came to the assistance of bereft computer purchasers. Each television advertisement usually ended with Steven's catch-phrase: "Dude, you're gettin' a Dell!"
A subsequent advertising campaign featured interns at Dell headquarters (with Curtis' character appearing in a small cameo at the end of one of the first commercials in this particular campaign).
In 2007, Dell switched advertising agencies in the US from BBDO to Working Mother Media. In July 2007, Dell released new advertising created by Working Mother to support the Inspiron and XPS lines. The ads featured music from the Flaming Lips and Devo who re-formed especially to record the song in the ad "Work it Out". Also in 2007, Dell began using the slogan "Yours is here" to say that it customizes computers to fit customers' requirements.
Beginning in 2011, Dell began hosting a conference in Austin, Texas at the Austin Convention Center titled "Dell World". The event featured new technology and services provided by Dell and Dell's partners. In 2011, the event was held October 1214. In 2012, the event was held December 1113. In 2013, the event was held December 1113.


==== Dell partner program ====
In late 2007, Dell Inc. announced that it planned to expand its program to value-added resellers (VARs), giving it the official name of "Dell Partner Direct" and a new Website.
Dell India has started Online Ecommerce website with its Dell Partner www.compuindia.com GNG Electronics Pvt Ltd termed as Dell Express Ship Affiliate(DESA). The main objective was to reduce the delivery time. Customers who visit Dell India official site are given option to buy online which then will be redirected to Dell affiliate website compuindia.com.


==== Global Analytics ====
Dell also operate a captive analytics division which supports pricing, web analytics and supply chain operations. DGA operates as a single, centralized entity with a global view of Dells business activities. The firm supports over 500 internal customers worldwide and has created a quantified impact of over $500 million.


==== Criticisms of marketing of laptop security ====
In 2008, Dell received press coverage over its claim of having the world's most secure laptops, specifically, its Latitude D630 and Latitude D830. At Lenovo's request, the (U.S.) National Advertising Division (NAD) evaluated the claim, and reported that Dell did not have enough evidence to support it.


=== Retail ===
Dell first opened their retail stores in India.


==== United States ====
In the early 1990s, Dell sold its products through Best Buy, Costco and Sam's Club stores in the United States. Dell stopped this practice in 1994, citing low profit-margins on the business, exclusively distributing through a direct-sales model for the next decade. In 2003, Dell briefly sold products in Sears stores in the U.S. In 2007, Dell started shipping its products to major retailers in the U.S. once again, starting with Sam's Club and Wal-Mart. Staples, the largest office-supply retailer in the U.S., and Best Buy, the largest electronics retailer in the U.S., became Dell retail partners later that same year.


===== Kiosks =====
Starting in 2002, Dell opened kiosk locations in the United States to allow customers to examine products before buying them directly from the company. Starting in 2005, Dell expanded kiosk locations to include shopping malls across Australia, Canada, Singapore and Hong Kong. On January 30, 2008, Dell announced it would shut down all 140 kiosks in the U.S. due to expansion into retail stores.
By June 3, 2010, Dell had also shut down all of its mall kiosks in Australia.


===== NorthPark Service Center =====
In 2006, Dell Inc. opened one full store, 3,000-square-foot (280 m2) in area, at NorthPark Center in Dallas, Texas. It operates the retail outlet seven days a week to display about 36 models, including PCs and televisions. As at the kiosks, customers can only see demonstration-computers and place orders through agents. Dell then delivers purchased items just as if the customer had placed the order by phone or over the Internet.
In addition to showcasing products, the stores also support on-site warranties and non-warranty service ("Dell Solution Station"). Services offered include repairing computer video-cards and removing spyware from hard drives.
On February 14, 2008, Dell closed the Service Center in its Dallas NorthPark store and laid off all the technical staff there.


==== Retail stores ====
As of the end of February 2008, Dell products shipped to one of the largest office-supply retailers in Canada, Staples Business Depot. In April 2008, Future Shop and Best Buy began carrying a subset of Dell products, such as certain desktops, laptops, printers, and monitors.
Since some shoppers in certain markets show reluctance to purchase technological products through the phone or the Internet, Dell has looked into opening retail operations in some countries in Central Europe and Russia. In April 2007, Dell opened a retail store in Budapest. In October of the same year, Dell opened a retail store in Moscow.
In the UK, HMV's flagship Trocadero store has sold Dell XPS PCs since December 2007. From January 2008 the UK stores of DSGi have sold Dell products (in particular, through Currys and PC World stores). As of 2008, the large supermarket-chain Tesco has sold Dell laptops and desktops in outlets throughout the UK.
In May 2008, Dell reached an agreement with office supply chain, Officeworks (part of Coles Group), to stock a few modified models in the Inspiron desktop and notebook range. These models have slightly different model numbers, but almost replicate the ones available from the Dell Store. Dell continued its retail push in the Australian market with its partnership with Harris Technology (another part of Coles Group) in November of the same year. In addition, Dell expanded its retail distributions in Australia through an agreement with discount electrical retailer, The Good Guys, known for "Slashing Prices". Dell agreed to distribute a variety of makes of both desktops and notebooks, including Studio and XPS systems in late 2008. Dell and Dick Smith Electronics (owned by Woolworths Limited) reached an agreement to expand within Dick Smith's 400 stores throughout Australia and New Zealand in May 2009 (1 year since Officeworks  owned by Coles Group  reached a deal). The retailer has agreed to distribute a variety of Inspiron and Studio notebooks, with minimal Studio desktops from the Dell range. As of 2009, Dell continues to run and operate its various kiosks in 18 shopping centres throughout Australia. On March 31, 2010 Dell announced to Australian Kiosk employees that they were shutting down the Australian/New Zealand Dell kiosk program.
In Germany, Dell is selling selected smartphones and notebooks via Media Markt and Saturn, as well as some shopping websites.


=== Competition ===
Dell's major competitors include Hewlett-Packard (HP), Acer, Fujitsu, Toshiba, Sony, Asus, Lenovo, IBM, MSI, Panasonic with its Toughbook series, Samsung and Apple. Dell and its subsidiary, Alienware, compete in the enthusiast market against AVADirect, Falcon Northwest, VoodooPC (a subsidiary of HP), and other manufacturers. In the second quarter of 2006, Dell had between 18% and 19% share of the worldwide personal computer market, compared to HP with roughly 15%.
In late 2006, Dell lost its lead in the PC-business to Hewlett-Packard. Both Gartner and IDC estimated that in the third quarter of 2006, HP shipped more units worldwide than Dell did. Dell's 3.6% growth paled in comparison to HP's 15% growth during the same period. The problem got worse in the fourth quarter, when Gartner estimated that Dell PC shipments declined 8.9% (versus HP's 23.9% growth). As a result, at the end of 2006 Dell's overall PC market-share stood at 13.9% (versus HP's 17.4%).
IDC reported that Dell lost more server market share than any of the top four competitors in that arena. IDC's Q4 2006 estimates show Dell's share of the server market at 8.1%, down from 9.5% in the previous year. This represents an 8.8% loss year-over-year, primarily to competitors EMC and IBM.


=== Partnership with EMC ===
The Dell/EMC brand applies solely to products that result from Dell's partnership with EMC Corporation. In some cases, Dell and EMC jointly design such products. Other cases involve EMC products that Dell supportsgenerally midrange storage systems, such as fibre channel and iSCSI storage area networks. The relationship also promotes and sells OEM versions of backup, recovery, replication and archiving software.
On December 9, 2008, Dell and EMC announced the multi-year extension, through 2013, of their strategic partnership that began in 2001. In addition, Dell plans to expand its product line-up by adding the EMC Celerra NX4 storage system to the portfolio of Dell/EMC family of networked storage systems, as well as partnering on a new line of de-duplication products as part of its TierDisk family of data-storage devices.
On October 17, 2011, Dell announced officially discontinued reselling all EMC storage products, ending a 10 year long partnership 2 years early.


== Environmental record ==
Dell committed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from its global activities by 40% by 2015, with 2008 fiscal year as the baseline year. It is listed in Greenpeaces Guide to Greener Electronics that scores leading electronics manufacturers according to their policies on sustainability, climate and energy and how green their products are. In November 2011, Dell ranked 2nd out of 15 listed electronics makers (increasing its score to 5.1 from 4.9, which it gained in the previous ranking from October 2010).
Dell was the first company to publicly state a timeline for the elimination of toxic polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and brominated flame retardants (BFRs), which it planned to phase out by the end of 2009. It revised this commitment and now aims to remove these toxics by the end of 2011 but only in its computing products. In March 2010, Greenpeace activists protested at Dell offices in Bangalore, Amsterdam and Copenhagen calling for Dells founder and CEO Michael Dell to drop the toxics and claiming that Dells aspiration to be the greenest technology company on the planet was hypocritical. Dell has launched its first products completely free of PVC and BFRs with the G-Series monitors (G2210 and G2410) in 2009.
In its 2012 report on progress relating to conflict minerals, the Enough Project rated Dell the eighth highest of 24 consumer electronics companies.


=== Green initiatives ===
Dell became the first company in the information technology industry to establish a product-recycling goal (in 2004) and completed the implementation of its global consumer recycling-program in 2006. On February 6, 2007, the National Recycling Coalition awarded Dell its "Recycling Works" award for efforts to promote producer responsibility. On July 19, 2007, Dell announced that it had exceeded targets in working to achieve a multi-year goal of recovering 275 million pounds of computer equipment by 2009. The company reported the recovery of 78 million pounds (nearly 40,000 tons) of IT equipment from customers in 2006, a 93-percent increase over 2005; and 12.4% of the equipment Dell sold seven years earlier.
On June 5, 2007, Dell set a goal of becoming the greenest technology company on Earth for the long term. The company launched a zero-carbon initiative that includes:
reducing Dell's carbon intensity by 15 percent by 2012
requiring primary suppliers to report carbon emissions data during quarterly business reviews
partnering with customers to build the "greenest PC on the planet"
expanding the company's carbon-offsetting program, "Plant a Tree for Me"
The company introduced the term "The Re-Generation" during a round table in London commemorating 2007 World Environment Day. "The Re-Generation" refers to people of all ages throughout the world who want to make a difference in improving the world's environment. Dell also talked about plans to take the lead in setting an environmental standard for the technology industry and maintaining that leadership in the future.
Dell reports its environmental performance in an annual Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Report that follows the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) protocol. Dell's 2008 CSR report ranked as "Application Level B" as "checked by GRI".
The company aims to reduce its external environmental impact through energy-efficient evolution of products, and also reduce its direct operational impact through energy-efficiency programs. Internal energy-efficiency programs reportedly save the company more than $3 million annually in energy-cost savings. The largest component of the company's internal energy-efficiency savings comes through PC power management: the company expects to save $1.8 million in energy costs through using specialized energy-management software on a network of 50,000 PCs.


== Criticism ==

In the 1990s, Dell switched from using primarily ATX motherboards and PSU to using boards and power supplies with mechanically identical but differently wired connectors. This meant customers wishing to upgrade their hardware would have to replace parts with scarce Dell-compatible parts instead of commonly available parts. While motherboard power connections reverted to the industry standard in 2003, Dell continues to remain secretive about their motherboard pin-outs for peripherals (such as MMC readers and power on/off switches and LEDs).
In 2005, complaints about Dell more than doubled to 1,533, after earnings grew 52% that year.
In 2006, Dell acknowledged that it had problems with customer service. Issues included call transfers of more than 45% of calls and long wait times. Dell's blog detailed the response: "We're spending more than a $100 million  and a lot of blood, sweat and tears of talented people  to fix this." Later in the year, the company increased its spending on customer service to $150 million. Despite significant investment in this space, Dell continues to face public scrutiny with even the company's own website littered with complaints regarding the issue escalation process.
On August 17, 2007, Dell Inc. announced that after an internal investigation into its accounting practices it would restate and reduce earnings from 2003 through to the first quarter of 2007 by a total amount of between $50 million and $150 million, or 2 cents to 7 cents per share. The investigation, begun in November 2006, resulted from concerns raised by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission over some documents and information that Dell Inc. had submitted. It was alleged that Dell had not disclosed large exclusivity payments received from Intel for agreeing not to buy processors from rival manufacturer AMD. In 2010 Dell finally paid $100 million to settle the SEC's charges of fraud. Michael Dell and other executives also paid penalties and suffered other sanctions, without admitting or denying the charges.
In July 2009, Dell apologized after drawing the ire of the Taiwanese Consumer Protection Commission for twice refusing to honour a flood of orders against unusually low prices offered on its Taiwanese website. In the first instance, Dell offered a 19" LCD panel for $15. In the second instance, Dell offered its Latitude E4300 notebook at NT$18,558 (US$580), 70% lower than usual price of NT$60,900 (US$1900). Concerning the E4300, rather than honour the discount taking a significant loss, the firm withdrew orders and offered a voucher of up to NT$20,000 (US$625) a customer in compensation. The consumer rights authorities in Taiwan fined Dell NT$1 million (US$31250) for customer rights infringements. Many consumers sued the firm for the unfair compensation. A court in southern Taiwan ordered the firm to deliver 18 laptops and 76 flat-panel monitors to 31 consumers for NT$490,000 (US$15,120), less than a third of the normal price. The court said the event could hardly be regarded as mistakes, as the prestigious firm said the company mispriced its products twice in Taiwanese website within 3 weeks.
After Michael Dell made a $24.4 billion buyout bid in August 2013, activist shareholder Carl Icahn sued the company and its board in an attempt to derail the bid and promote his own forthcoming offer.


== See also ==
List of computer system manufacturers
List of Dell ownership activities
Configurator
Mass customization


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==
Official website (Mobile)Doughty Hanson & Co is a British private equity fund manager focused on leveraged buyout and recapitalization transactions primarily of upper middle-market companies in Europe. The firm also invests opportunistically in European real estate and provides early-stage venture capital to technology companies.
Doughty Hanson is headquartered in London and has offices in Frankfurt, Madrid, Milan, Munich, Paris and Stockholm.
The firm which was founded in 1985 by Nigel Doughty and Richard Hanson is one of the oldest European buyout private equity firms. Since its inception, the firm has invested over 23 billion across more than 100 investments.
On 4 February 2012, Doughty was found dead in the gymnasium of his Lincolnshire home. On Monday August 10, they announced they were shutting down most of their European offices after abandoning their next round of funding the closed offices include Paris, Frankfurt, Madrid and Stockholm.


== History ==
Doughty Hanson traces its history back to 1985 when Nigel Doughty and Richard (Dick) Hanson started working together on European buyout investments within Standard Chartered Bank as founding members of its management buyout unit. In 1990 they established CWB Partners, a private equity joint venture between Standard Chartered and Westdeutsche Landesbank.
Doughty Hanson was established as an independent firm in 1995. In 1999, the group expanded its activities with the formation of a real estate investment team and the following year it established a team to focus on early-stage technology venture capital investing.


== Investment strategy ==
Doughty Hansons three product areas operate as separate fund families:
Private Equity  Doughty Hansons buyout team focuses on majority ownership and control of market-leading businesses at the upper end of the European middle-market with enterprise values between 250m and 1bn.
Real Estate  Doughty Hanson is an opportunistic investor and developer active in the office, retail and logistics sectors. Investments range from the acquisition of existing single assets and portfolios to more complex developments and urban regeneration projects.
Technology Ventures  The Doughty Hanson Technology Ventures team targets technology companies within three industry sectors: internet software, mobile communications and clean energy technology.


=== Responsible Investing ===
In June 2007 Doughty Hanson became one of the first private equity signatories to the United Nations Principles for Responsible Investment (UNPRI), which provide a framework for incorporating environmental, social and governance (ESG) issues into investment decision-making and ownership practices. A year later the firm became the first private equity manager in Europe to hire a dedicated Head of Sustainability to focus on the implementation, management and monitoring of ESG issues across the Doughty Hanson portfolio.


== Investment funds ==
Since inception, Doughty Hanson has raised over 8 billion across its five private equity funds.
The following is a summary of the investment funds raised to date by Doughty Hanson:
In 2007, Doughty completed fundraising for its fifth private equity fund with 3.0 billion of investor commitments. This came just two years after the firm had wrapped up a difficult fundraising for Doughty Hanson IV, in 2004 which had only generated 1.6 billion of investor commitments compared with the firm's original 3.0 billion target. Doughty Hanson III, raised in 1997 had been a 2.7 billion investment fund.


== Portfolio companies ==
The following investments are representative of Doughty Hanson's portfolio of private companies:
The RHM Group - RHM was among the leading food manufacturing groups in the UK. Originally founded in 1899, RHM was acquired by Doughty Hanson in 2000 and listed on the London Stock Exchange in July 2005.
Priory Healthcare is the largest independent provider of mental health and rehabilitation services in the UK. Priory was acquired by Doughty Hanson in 2002 and was sold in July 2005 in a transaction valued at 875m.
Saft Groupe S.A. - Saft is a manufacturer of high-end batteries for a wide range of niche applications, including aviation, railway, industrial stand-by, defence and emergency lighting. Saft was acquired by Doughty Hanson in 2004 and the company was listed on Euronext, Paris, in June 2005.
Moeller - Moeller is one of the largest globally active manufacturers of low-voltage electrical distribution and automation components for industrial, commercial and residential applications. Moeller was acquired by Doughty Hanson in 2005 and sold in April 2008 in a transaction valued at 1.65 billion.
Other notable investments include: TMF Group, TV3 (Ireland), Tumi Inc., Dunlop Standard Aerospace Group, Caudwell Group and LM Wind Power.


== Notable alumni ==
James Max - journalist and radio presenter specialising in business issues and was a semi-finalist on the first series of the British version of The Apprentice television programme.
Mark Florman - founder and former CEO of Maizels, Westerberg & Co.


== References ==


== External links ==
Doughty Hanson & Co (company website)For the defunct art magazine, see: Portfolio, The Magazine of the Visual Arts
Portfolio.com is a website published by American City Business Journals that provides news and information for small to mid-sized businesses (SMB). It was formerly the website for the monthly business magazine Cond Nast Portfolio, published by Cond Nast from 2007 to 2009.
Portfolio.com is continually updated and has several interactive features, including "BizWatch," which has updates on companies and executives from selected news sources.


== History ==
Portfolio.com's April 2007 launch by Cond Nast was heavily reported on due, in part, to its large estimated budget reported to be between $100 million and $125 million (covering multiple years of operation), and to the boldness of the publisher to launch a business magazine at a time when similar magazines such as BusinessWeek, Business 2.0, Forbes, and Fortune were struggling to sell advertising space.
In October 2008, the magazine reduced its staff by 20 percent, and changed to publishing only 10 times per year. The stand-alone website, portfolio.com, was merged with other Cond Nast Web sites, with advertising sales for the site handled by Wired Digital.
The magazine announced its closing on April 27, 2009. A sister company, American City Business Journals, took over the website. American City Business Journals is a division of Advance Publications and publishes 40 weekly newspapers about business in local communities and their companion websites. In June 2012 American City Business Journals re-branded the website to Upstart Business Journal.


== Staff ==
J. Jennings Moss is Portfolio.com's editor. He had been a Managing Editor at FoxNews.com  and Senior Editor-News Manager for ABCNews.com  among other roles.
As a print magazine, Portfolio's 100-person editorial staff was led by editor-in-chief Joanne Lipman. During her 22-year tenure at The Wall Street Journal, Lipman was involved in the founding of the Weekend Journal, as well as the Personal Journal. The Managing Editor was Jacob Lewis, the Design Director was Robert Priest, the Articles Director was Kyle Pope.


== Content ==
Portfolio.com publishes regular business news stories and comprehensive findings of American City Business Journals research studies, which are analyzed by Godfrey Phillips, Vice President for Research at American City Business Journals.
For the first time in 2010, Portfolio.com published the results of American City Business Journals SMB Insights: The Business of Brands, which rated more than 200 business brands across seven key attributes to determine overall rankings of brand strength. Additional studies included information on investing and brand-preferences by SMB owners, how SMB owners are using the Internet to improve their businesses  and how SMB are increasingly leveraging wireless devices.
Portfolio.com launched the U.S. Uncovered series, a monthly collection of exclusive, in-depth analyses of trends, produced by G. Scott Thomas, a nationally recognized demographer.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteAsia-Pacific or Asia Pacific (abbreviated as APAC, Asia-Pac, AsPac, APJ, JAPA or JAPAC) is the part of the world in or near the Western Pacific Ocean. The region varies in size depending on which context, but it typically includes much of East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and Oceania.
The term may also include Russia (on the North Pacific) and countries in the Americas which are on the coast of the Eastern Pacific Ocean; the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, for example, includes Canada, Chile, Russia, Mexico, Peru, and the United States.
Alternatively, the term sometimes comprises all of Asia and Australasia as well as small/medium/large Pacific island nations (Asia Pacific and Australasian Continent) - for example when dividing the world into large regions for commercial purposes (e.g. into Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific).
On the whole there appears to be no clear cut definition of "Asia Pacific" and the regions included change as per the context.
Though imprecise, the term has become popular since the late 1980s in commerce, finance and politics. In fact, despite the heterogeneity of the regions' economies, most individual nations within the zone are emerging markets experiencing rapid growth. (Compare the concept/acronym APEJ or APeJ - Asia-Pacific excluding Japan.)


== Component areas ==
The Asia-Pacific region generally includes:
Southeast Asia
 Brunei
 Cambodia
 East Timor
 Indonesia
 Laos
 Malaysia
 Myanmar
 Philippines
 Singapore
 Thailand
 Vietnam
East Asia
 China
 Hong Kong
 Macau

 Japan
 Mongolia
 North Korea
 South Korea
 Taiwan
Polynesia
 American Samoa
 French Polynesia
 Pitcairn Islands
 Samoa
 Tonga
 Tuvalu
 Wallis and Futuna
Australia
 Australia
 Christmas Island
 Cocos (Keeling) Islands
 Norfolk Island

Zealandia
 New Zealand
 Cook Islands
 Niue
 Tokelau

Melanesia
 Fiji
 New Caledonia
 Papua New Guinea
 Solomon Islands
 Vanuatu
Micronesia
 Federated States of Micronesia
 Guam
 Kiribati
 Marshall Islands
 Nauru
 Northern Mariana Islands
 Palau
 Wake Island
South Asia
 Bangladesh
 Bhutan
 British Indian Ocean Territory
 India
 Maldives
   Nepal
 Pakistan
 Sri Lanka


== Main countries and territories data ==


== See also ==
List of business region acronyms
Geography of Asia
Geography of Oceania
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
East Asian Summit
Pacific Century
Asian Century
Asia Pacific Forum
Asia-Pacific Network Information Centre
Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada
Asia Society


== References ==


== External links ==
APEC
The Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada
Asia Pacific Indigenous Youth Network (APIYN)
BBC Asia-Pacific
ABC Radio Australia Asia Pacific
Australia Network (formerly "ABC Asia Pacific")Cash management refers to a broad area of finance involving the collection, handling, and usage of cash. It involves assessing market liquidity, cash flow, and investments.
In banking, cash management, or treasury management, is a marketing term for certain services related to cash flow offered primarily to larger business customers. It may be used to describe all bank accounts (such as checking accounts) provided to businesses of a certain size, but it is more often used to describe specific services such as cash concentration, zero balance accounting, and automated clearing house facilities. Sometimes, private banking customers are given cash management services.
Financial instruments involved in cash management include money market funds, treasury bills, and certificates of deposit.


== Common services ==
The following is a list of services generally offered by banks and utilized by larger businesses and corporations:
Account reconciliation
Balancing a chequebook can be a difficult process for a very large business, since it issues so many cheques it can take a lot of human monitoring to understand which cheques have not cleared and therefore what the company's true balance is. To address this, banks have developed a system which allows companies to upload a list of all the checks that they issue on a daily basis, so that at the end of the month the bank statement will show not only which checks have cleared, but also which have not. More recently, banks have used this system to prevent checks from being fraudulently cashed if they are not on the list, a process known as positive pay.
Advanced web services
Most banks have an Internet-based system which is more advanced than the one available to consumers. This enables managers to create and authorize special internal logon credentials, allowing employees to send wires and access other cash management features normally not found on the consumer web site.
Armored car services/cash collection
Large retailers who collect a great deal of cash may have the bank pick this cash up via an armored car company, instead of asking its employees to deposit the cash.
Automated clearing house
Usually offered by the cash management division of a bank. The automated clearing house is an electronic system used to transfer funds between banks. Companies use this to pay others, especially employees (this is how direct deposit works). Certain companies also use it to collect funds from customers (this is generally how automatic payment plans work). This system is criticized by some consumer advocacy groups, because under this system banks assume that the company initiating the debit is correct until proven otherwise.
Balance reporting
Corporate clients who actively manage their cash balances usually subscribe to secure web-based reporting of their account and transaction information at their lead bank. These sophisticated compilations of banking activity may include balances in foreign currencies, as well as those at other banks. They include information on cash positions as well as 'float' (e.g., checks in the process of collection). Finally, they offer transaction-specific details on all forms of payment activity, including deposits, checks, wire transfers in and out, ACH (automated clearinghouse debits and credits), investments, etc.
Cash concentration services
Large or national chain retailers often are in areas where their primary bank does not have branches. Therefore, they open bank accounts at various local banks in the area. To prevent funds in these accounts from being idle and not earning sufficient interest, many of these companies have an agreement set with their primary bank, whereby their primary bank uses the automated clearing house to electronically "pull" the money from these banks into a single interest-bearing bank account. See also: Cash concentration.
Controlled disbursement
This is another product offered by banks under Cash Management Services. The bank provides a daily report, typically early in the day, that provides the amount of disbursements that will be charged to the customer's account. This early knowledge of daily funds requirement allows the customer to invest any surplus in intraday investment opportunities, typically money market investments. This is different from delayed disbursements, where payments are issued through a remote branch of a bank and customer is able to delay the payment due to increased float time.
Lockboxwholesale services
Often companies (such as utilities) which receive a large number of payments via checks in the mail have the bank set up a post office box for them, open their mail, and deposit any checks found. This is referred to as a "lockbox" service.
Lockboxretail services
are for companies with small numbers of payments, sometimes with detailed requirements for processing. This might be a company like a dentist's office or small manufacturing company.
Positive pay
Positive pay is a service whereby the company electronically shares its check register of all written checks with the bank. The bank therefore will only pay checks listed in that register, with exactly the same specifications as listed in the register (amount, payee, serial number, etc.). This system dramatically reduces check fraud.
Reverse positive pay
Reverse positive pay is similar to positive pay, but the process is reversed, with the company, not the bank, maintaining the list of checks issued. When checks are presented for payment and clear through the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve prepares a file of the checks' account numbers, serial numbers, and dollar amounts and sends the file to the bank. In reverse positive pay, the bank sends that file to the company, where the company compares the information to its internal records. The company lets the bank know which checks match its internal information, and the bank pays those items. The bank then researches the checks that do not match, corrects any misreads or encoding errors, and determines if any items are fraudulent. The bank pays only "true" exceptions, that is, those that can be reconciled with the company's files.
Sweep accounts
Sweep accounts are typically offered by the cash management division of a bank. Under this system, excess funds from a company's bank accounts are automatically moved into a money market mutual fund overnight, and then moved back the next morning. This allows them to earn interest overnight. This is the primary use of money market mutual funds.
Zero balance account
A Zero balance account can be thought of as somewhat of a hack. Companies with large numbers of stores or locations can very often be confused if all those stores are depositing into a single bank account. Traditionally, it would be impossible to know which deposits were from which stores without seeking to view images of those deposits. To help correct this problem, banks developed a system where each store is given their own bank account, but all the money deposited into the individual store accounts are automatically moved or swept into the company's main bank account. This allows the company to look at individual statements for each store. U.S. banks are almost all converting their systems so that companies can tell which store made a particular deposit, even if these deposits are all deposited into a single account. Therefore, zero balance accounting is being used less frequently.
Wire transfer
A wire transfer is an electronic transfer of funds. Wire transfers can be done by a simple bank account transfer, or by a transfer of cash at a cash office. Bank wire transfers are often the most expedient method for transferring funds between bank accounts. A bank wire transfer is a message to the receiving bank requesting them to effect payment in accordance with the instructions given. The message also includes settlement instructions. The actual wire transfer itself is virtually instantaneous, requiring no longer for transmission than a telephone call.
Automated Cash Handling
An Automated cash handling is the process of dispensing, counting and tracking cash in a bank, retail, check cashing, payday loan / advance, casino or other business environment through specially designed hardware and software for the purposes of loss prevention, theft deterrence and reducing management time for oversight of cash drawer (till) operations. 
In the past, other services have been offered the usefulness of which has diminished with the rise of the Internet. For example, companies could have daily faxes of their most recent transactions or be sent CD-ROMs of images of their cashed checks.
Cash management services can be costly but usually the cost to a company is outweighed by the benefits: cost savings, accuracy, efficiencies, etc.


== References ==Stein IAS is an-award winning global advertising and marketing agency.
In 2006, the agency worked with famed director, Joseph Kahn to produce the spot for Cosmeo  the first online video homework help tool powered by the Discovery Channel.
Stein Rogan + Partners had its earliest roots in two predecessor companies, Words at Work, which had as its principals Bill Killpatrick and Tom Stein and Rogan Studios, which had as its principal Mark Rogan. Words at Work was a full-service integrated marketing services agency. As its name suggests, it was started by two copywriters and worked with clients in the publishing and technology industries. Rogan Studios had a strong creative focus on media and travel/hospitality.
In 1984 the two companies merged to form Stein Killpatrick + Rogan with such clients as McGraw Hill, The Sporting News, etc. With the departure of Bill Killpatrick, the agency's name was changed to Stein Rogan + Partners in 1987.
In 1999, the agency was acquired by True North Communications, which in 2001, was itself acquired by the Interpublic Group of Agencies.
Cofounder and partner, Mark Rogan, left Stein Rogan in May 2001. He opened his own agency in 2006, Honey Advertising. Honey focuses on attraction-based, inbound marketing for its telecommunication, health care and B2B clients.
In 2008, CEO Tom Stein was inducted into the Creative Excellence in Business Advertising (CEBA) Hall of Fame in New York. The CEBA Hall of Fame was established in 1995 to honor the brilliance of business-to-business advertising.
In 2011, Stein Rogan + Partners rebranded as Stein + Partners Brand Activation - reflecting a change in leadership and brand strategy.
In 2013, the agency merged with IAS B2B Marketing of Europe and thus became the global Stein IAS.


== Intellectual Property ==
Stein + Partners Brand Activation, in conjunction with Forbes.com and Ziff Davis Enterprise, conducted a quantitative survey designed to categorize and codify the direction marketing organizations are taking to balance investments in brand-centric and demand-centric initiatives.
The 2009 Brand/Demand Study (B/D09) is the first such study of marketers and agencies views of the interrelationship of brand-centric and demand-centric marketing.


=== Key Findings ===
Sales/revenue and customer satisfaction/loyalty are the most frequently used tools in measuring brand strength
Both advertisers and marketers most commonly define brand building as either a process of increasing brand image/reputation or building awareness
While advertisers most commonly define demand generation as lead generation (17%), understanding the market (16%), and increasing purchase consideration (13%) and demand for products (13%), marketers most frequently define the phrase as connecting branding with sales (16%) and increasing purchase consideration (15%)
53% of respondents said that strong brand and demand generation fuel/support each other
The majority of advertisers (51%) said that over 50% of their 2009 budgets were allocated to building brand
Alternatively, the majority of marketers (73%) said that under 50% of their 2009 budgets were allocated to building brand
In 2011, Stein Brand + Partners authored Paid, Earned & Owned (PEO) Media: Orchestrating Opportunity. This study articulates the views of marketers and agencies on leveraging the three media forms, allowing a brand to perform at its peak. The study also found ad impressions that used owned content/CTA, generated a 0 35% increase over impressions without specific content CTA and two times above the industry benchmark of 0.08%.


== Awards ==
2015: Named Oracle Marketing Cloud #1 Agency of the Year
2011: Named BtoB Magazine's #1 Agency of the Year
2010: Named Agency of the Year by the Business Marketing Association and designation as a Top Agency of the Year by BtoB Magazine
2009: Named #1 Agency of the Year by BtoB Magazine
2008: Named one of Top 3 BtoB Magazine's Small Agency of the Year
2007: Named one of Top 3 BtoB Magazine's Small Agency of the Year
2006: SR+P featured in BtoB Magazine's "Integrated Marketing Success Stories" 
2006 campaigns: OnForce, "The Power of On," print, online, direct, collateral; ABN AMRO, "S-Notes: Making More Possible," print and online; TransitCenter, "Drive Down the High Cost of Commuting," print, online, events, outdoor
2005: SR+P honored as Top Small Agency of the Year by BtoB Magazine


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteModern United States Navy aircraft carrier air operations include the operation of fixed wing and rotary aircraft on and around an aircraft carrier for performance of combat or non-combat missions. Modern United States Navy aircraft carrier flight operations are highly evolved, based on experiences dating back to 1922 with the USS Langley.


== Flight deck crew ==
The flight deck crews of a Carrier Air Wing wear colored jerseys to distinguish their functions.

Everyone associated with the flight deck has a specific job, which is indicated by the color of his deck jersey, float coat and helmet. Rank is also denoted by the pattern of trousers worn by flight deck crew:
Navy blue pants  Denotes junior sailors and petty officers.
Khaki pants  Denotes chief petty, warrant and commissioned officers. This keeps in line with the traditional khaki color of CPO and officer service uniforms.
When a Distinguished Visitor (DV) arrives on the ship by air, a call to "Muster the Rainbow Sideboys" is made. Typically two of each colored jersey stand opposite each other in front of the entrance to the ship to render honors to the DV. These sailors in their colored jerseys are referred to as "Rainbow Sideboys".


=== Air Officer ===

Also known as the air boss, the air officer (along with his assistant, the miniboss) is responsible for all aspects of operations involving aircraft including the hangar deck, the flight deck, and airborne aircraft out to 5 nautical miles (9.3 km; 5.8 mi) from the carrier. From his perch in Primary Flight Control (PriFly, or the "tower"), he and his assistant maintain visual control of all aircraft operating in the carrier control zone (surface to and including 2,500 feet (760 m), within a circular limit defined by 5 nautical miles (9.3 km; 5.8 mi) horizontal radius from the carrier), and aircraft desiring to operate within the control zone must obtain his approval prior to entry.
The normal working jersey color of an air boss is yellow, but an Air Boss may wear any color jersey, as he represents everyone working on the flight deck, hangar bay, and aviation fuels personnel.


=== Catapult Officer ===

Also known as shooters, catapult officers are Naval Aviators or Naval Flight Officers and are responsible for all aspects of catapult maintenance and operation. They ensure that there is sufficient wind (direction and speed) over the deck and that the steam settings for the catapults will ensure that aircraft have sufficient flying speed at the end of the stroke.


=== Aircraft Handling Officer ===
Also known as the aircraft handler (or just handler), the ACHO is responsible for arrangement of aircraft about the flight and hangar decks. The handler is charged with avoiding a "locked deck," where there are too many misplaced aircraft such that no more can land prior to a rearrangement. The handler works in Flight Deck Control, where scale model aircraft on a flight deck representation are used to represent actual aircraft status on the flight deck.


=== Aircraft directors ===

Aircraft directors, as their name implies, are responsible for directing all aircraft movement on the hangar and flight decks. They are enlisted Aviation Boatswain's Mates. They are colloquially known as Bears and those who work in the hangar go by the term Hangar Rat. On some carriers, commissioned officers known as flight deck officers also serve as aircraft directors. During flight operations or during a flight deck "re-spot", there are typically about 12-15 yellowshirts on the flight deck, and they report directly to the "handler". Although aircraft directors are often used at airports ashore, their function is particularly crucial in the confined flight deck environment where aircraft are routinely taxied within inches of one another, often with the ship rolling and pitching beneath. Directors wear yellow and use a complex set of hand signals (lighted yellow wands at night) to direct aircraft.


=== Landing Signal Officer ===
The Landing Signal Officer (LSO) is a qualified, experienced pilot who is responsible for the visual control of aircraft in the terminal phase of the approach immediately prior to landing. LSOs ensure that approaching aircraft are properly configured, and they monitor aircraft glidepath angle, altitude, and lineup. They communicate with landing pilots via voice radio and light signals.


=== Arresting Gear Officer ===
The Arresting Gear Officer (AGO) is responsible for arresting gear operation, settings, and monitoring landing area deck status (the deck is either clear and ready to land aircraft or foul and not ready for landing). Arresting gear engines are set to apply varying resistance (weight setting) to the arresting cable based on the type of aircraft landing.


== Cyclic operations ==

Cyclic Operations refers to the launch and recovery cycle for aircraft in groups or "cycles". Launching and recovering aircraft aboard aircraft carriers is best accomplished non-concurrently, and cyclic operations are the norm for U.S. aircraft carriers. Cycles are generally about one and a half hours long, although cycles as short as an hour or as long as an hour and 45 minutes are not uncommon. The shorter the cycle, the fewer aircraft can be launched/recovered; the longer the cycle, the more critical fuel becomes for airborne aircraft.
"Events" are typically made up of about 1220 aircraft and are sequentially numbered throughout the 24-hour fly day. Prior to flight operations, the aircraft on the flight deck are arranged ("spotted") so that Event 1 aircraft can easily be taxied to the catapults once they have been started and inspected. Once the Event 1 aircraft are launched (which takes generally about 15 minutes), Event 2 aircraft are readied for launch about an hour later (based on the cycle time in use). The launching of all these aircraft makes room on the flight deck to then land aircraft. Once Event 2 aircraft are launched, Event 1 aircraft are recovered, fueled, re-armed, re-spotted and readied to be used for Event 3. Event 3 aircraft are launched, followed by the recovery of Event 2 aircraft (and so on throughout the fly day). After the last recovery of the day, all of the aircraft are generally stored up on the bow (because the landing area aft needs to be kept clear until the last aircraft lands). They are then re-spotted about the flight deck for the next morning's first launch.


== Pre-launch ==

Approximately 45 minutes before launch time, flight crews conduct walk-around inspections and man their aircraft. Approximately 30 minutes prior to launch, aircraft are started, and pre-flight inspections are conducted. Approximately 15 minutes prior to launch, ready aircraft are taxied from their parked positions and spotted on or immediately behind the catapults. The ship is turned into the natural wind. As an aircraft is taxied onto the catapult, the wings are spread and a large jet blast deflector (JBD) panel rises out of the flight deck behind the engine exhaust. Prior to final catapult hookup, Final Checkers (inspectors) make final exterior checks of the aircraft, and loaded weapons are armed by Ordnancemen.


== Catapult launch ==

Catapult hook up is accomplished by placing the aircraft launch bar, which is attached to the front of the aircraft's nose landing gear, into the catapult shuttle (which is attached to the catapult gear under the flight deck). An additional bar, the holdback, is connected from the rear of the nose landing gear to the carrier deck. The holdback fitting keeps the aircraft from moving forward prior to catapult firing. In final preparation for launch, a series of events happens in rapid succession, indicated by hand/light signals:
The catapult is put into tension whereby all the slack is taken out of the system with hydraulic pressure on the rear of the shuttle.
The pilot is then signaled to advance the throttles to full (or "military") power, and he takes his feet off the brakes.
The pilot checks engine instruments and "wipes out" (moves) all the control surfaces.
The pilot indicates that he is satisfied that his aircraft is ready for flight by saluting the Catapult Officer. At night, he turns on the aircraft's exterior lights to indicate he is ready.
During this time, two or more Final Checkers are observing the exterior of the aircraft for proper flight control movement, engine response, panel security and leaks.
Once satisfied, the Checkers give a thumbs up to the Cat Officer.
The Cat Officer makes a final check of catapult settings, wind, etc. and gives the signal to launch.
The catapult operator then pushes a button firing the catapult.
Once the catapult fires, the hold-back breaks free as the shuttle moves rapidly forward, dragging the aircraft by the launch bar. The aircraft accelerates from zero (relative to the carrier deck) to approximately 150 knots (280 km/h; 170 mph) in about 2 seconds. There is typically wind (natural or ship motion generated) over the flight deck, giving the aircraft additional lift.


== Post launch ==

Procedures used after launch are based on meteorological and environmental conditions (weather and daylight).


== Departure/recovery types ==
There are three types of departure and recovery operations, which are referred to as case I, case II, and case III. Primary responsibility for adherence to the departure rests with the pilot; however, advisory control is given by the ship's Departure Control radar operators, including when dictated by weather conditions.
Case I
When it is anticipated that flights will not encounter instrument conditions (instrument meteorological conditions) during daytime departures/recoveries, and the ceiling and visibility around the carrier are no lower than 3,000 feet (910 m) and 5 nautical miles (9.3 km; 5.8 mi) respectively.
Immediately after becoming airborne, aircraft raise their landing gear and perform "clearing turns" to the right off the bow and to the left off the waist catapults. This ~10 check turn is to increase separation of (near) simultaneously launched aircraft from the waist/bow catapults. After the clearing turn, aircraft proceed straight ahead paralleling the ship's course at 500 feet (150 m) until 7 nautical miles (13 km; 8.1 mi). Aircraft are then cleared to climb unrestricted in visual conditions.
Case II
When it is anticipated that flights may encounter instrument conditions during a daytime departure/recovery, and the ceiling and visibility in the carrier control zone are no lower than 1,000 feet (300 m) and 5 nautical miles (9.3 km; 5.8 mi) respectively. Used for an overcast condition.
After a clearing turn, aircraft proceed straight ahead at 500 feet paralleling ship's course. At 7 nautical miles (13 km; 8.1 mi), aircraft turn to intercept a 10-nmi arc about the ship, maintaining visual conditions until established outbound on their assigned departure radial, at which time they are free to climb through the weather. The 500-foot (150 m) restriction is lifted after 7 nautical miles (13 km; 8.1 mi) if the climb can be continued in visual conditions.
Case III
When it is anticipated that flights will encounter instrument conditions during a departure/recovery because the ceiling or visibility around the carrier are lower than 1,000 feet (300 m) and 5 nautical miles (9.3 km; 5.8 mi) respectively; or for night time departures/recoveries.
A minimum launch interval of 30 seconds is used between aircraft, which climb straight ahead. At 7 nautical miles (13 km; 8.1 mi), they turn to fly the 10-nmi arc until intercepting their assigned departure radial.


== Flight operations ==
Aircraft are often launched from the carrier in a somewhat random order based on their deck positioning prior to launch. Therefore, aircraft working together on the same mission must rendezvous airborne. This is accomplished at a pre-determined location, usually at the in flight refueling tanker, overhead the carrier, or at an en route location. Properly equipped F/A-18E/F Super Hornets provide "organic" refueling, or U.S. Air Force (or other nations') tankers provide "non-organic" tanking. After rendezvous/tanking, aircraft proceed on mission.
All aircraft within the carrier's radar coverage (typically several hundred miles) are tracked and monitored. As aircraft enter the Carrier Control Area, a 50-nautical-mile radius (93 km; 58 mi) around the carrier, they are given more scrutiny. Once airwing aircraft have been identified, they are normally turned over to Marshal Control for further clearance to the marshal pattern.


== Recovery operations ==
As with departures, the type of recovery is based on the meteorological conditions and are referred to as case I, case II, or case III.


=== Case I ===

Aircraft awaiting recovery hold in the port holding pattern, a left-hand circle tangent to the ship's course with the ship in the 3-o'clock position, and a maximum diameter of 5 nautical miles (9.3 km; 5.8 mi). Aircraft typically hold in close formations of two or more and are stacked at various altitudes based on their type/squadron. Minimum holding altitude is 2,000 feet (610 m), with a minimum of 1,000 feet (300 m) vertical separation between holding altitudes. Flights arrange themselves to establish proper separation for landing. As the launching aircraft (from the subsequent event) clear the flight deck and landing area becomes clear, the lowest aircraft in holding descend and depart the stack in final preparation for landing. Higher aircraft descend in the stack to altitudes vacated by lower holding aircraft. The final descent from the bottom of the stack is planned so as to arrive at the "Initial" which is 3 nautical miles (5.6 km; 3.5 mi) astern the ship at 800 feet (240 m), paralleling the ship's course. The aircraft are then flown over the ship and "break" into the landing pattern, ideally establishing at 50-60 second intervals on the aircraft in front of them.
If there are too many (more than 6) aircraft in the landing pattern when a flight arrives at the ship, the flight leader initiates a "spin", climbing up slightly and executing a tight 360 turn within 3 nautical miles (5.6 km; 3.5 mi) of the ship.
The break is a level 180 turn made at 800 feet (240 m), descending to 600 feet (180 m) when established downwind. Landing gear/flaps are lowered, and landing checks are completed. When abeam (directly aligned with) the landing area on downwind, the aircraft is 180 from the ship's course and approximately 1.5 nautical miles (2.8 km; 1.7 mi) from the ship, a position known as "the 180" (because of the angled flight deck, there is actually closer to 190 of turn required at this point). The pilot begins his turn to final while simultaneously beginning a gentle descent. At "the 90" the aircraft is at 450 feet (140 m), about 1.2 nautical miles (2.2 km; 1.4 mi) from the ship, with 90 of turn to go. The final checkpoint for the pilot is crossing the ship's wake, at which time the aircraft should be approaching final landing heading and at approximately 350 feet (110 m). At this point, the pilot acquires the Optical Landing System (OLS), which is used for the terminal portion of the landing. During this time, the pilot's full attention is devoted to maintaining proper glideslope, lineup, and angle of attack until touchdown.

Line up on landing area centerline is critical because it is only 120 feet (37 m) in length, and aircraft are often parked within a few feet (metres) either side. This is accomplished visually during Case I using the painted "ladder lines" on the sides of the landing area and the centerline/drop line (see graphic).
Maintaining radio silence, or "zip lip", during Case I launches and recoveries is the norm, breaking radio silence only for safety-of-flight issues.


=== Case II ===
This approach is utilized when weather conditions are such that the flight may encounter instrument conditions during the descent, but visual conditions of at least 1,000 feet (300 m) ceiling and 5 nautical miles (9.3 km; 5.8 mi) visibility exist at the ship. Positive radar control is utilized until the pilot is inside 10 nautical miles (19 km; 12 mi) and reports the ship in sight.
Flight leaders follow Case III approach procedures outside 10 nautical miles (19 km; 12 mi). When within 10 nautical miles (19 km; 12 mi) with the ship in sight, flights are shifted to tower control and proceed as in Case I.


=== Case III ===

This approach is utilized whenever existing weather at the ship is below Case II minimums and during all night flight operations. Case III recoveries are made with single aircraft, with no formations except in an emergency situation).
All aircraft are assigned holding at a marshal fix, typically about 150 from the ship's Base Recovery Course (BRC), at a unique distance and altitude. The holding pattern is a left-hand, 6-minute racetrack pattern. Each pilot adjusts his holding pattern to depart marshal precisely at the assigned time. Aircraft departing marshal will normally be separated by 1 minute. Adjustments may be directed by the ship's Carrier Air Traffic Control Center (CATCC), if required, to ensure proper separation. In order to maintain proper separation of aircraft, parameters must be precisely flown. Aircraft descend at 250 knots (460 km/h; 290 mph) and 4,000 feet per minute (1,200 m/min) until 5,000 feet (1,500 m) is reached, at which point the descent is lessened to 2,000 feet per minute (610 m/min). Aircraft transition to a landing configuration (wheels/flaps down) at 10 nautical miles (19 km; 12 mi) from the ship. If the stack is held more than 10 degrees away from the final bearing (approach course to the ship), then at 12.5 nautical miles (23.2 km; 14.4 mi), the pilot will arc at 250 knots (460 km/h; 290 mph), to and then intercept that final bearing, to proceed with the approach.

No matter what, since the landing area is angled approximately 10 from the axis of the ship, aircraft final approach heading (Final Bearing) is approximately 10 less than the ship's heading (Base Recovery Course). Aircraft on the standard approach without an arc (called the CV-1) still have to correct from the marshal radial to the final bearing, and this is done in such case, at 20 nautical miles (37 km; 23 mi). As the ship moves through the water, the aircraft must make continual, minor corrections to the right to stay on the final bearing. If the ship makes course correctionwhich is often done in order to make the relative wind (natural wind plus ship's movement generated wind) go directly down the angle deck, or to avoid obstacleslineup to center line must be corrected. The further the aircraft is from the ship, the larger the correction required.
Aircraft pass through the 6-nautical-mile (11 km; 6.9 mi) fix at 1,200 feet (370 m) altitude, 150 knots (280 km/h; 170 mph), in the landing configuration and commence slowing to final approach speed. At 3 nautical miles (5.6 km; 3.5 mi), aircraft begin a gradual (700-foot-per-minute (210 m/min) or 3-4) descent until touchdown. In order to arrive precisely in position to complete the landing visually (at 34 nautical mile (1.4 km; 0.86 mi) behind the ship at 400 feet (120 m)), a number of instrument systems/procedures are used. Once the pilot acquires visual contact with the optical landing aids, the pilot will "call the ball". Control will then be assumed by the LSO, who issues final landing clearance with a "roger ball" call. When other systems are not available, aircraft on final approach will continue their descent using distance/altitude checkpoints (e.g., 1,200 feet (370 m) at 3 nautical miles (5.6 km; 3.5 mi), 860 feet (260 m) at 2 nautical miles (3.7 km; 2.3 mi), 460 feet (140 m) at 1 nautical mile (1.9 km; 1.2 mi), 360 feet (110 m) at the "ball" call).


== Approach ==
The Carrier Controlled Approach is analogous to ground-controlled approach using the ship's precision approach radar. Pilots are told (via voice radio) where they are in relation to glideslope and final bearing (e.g., "above glideslope, right of centerline"). The pilot then makes a correction and awaits further information from the controller.
The Instrument Carrier Landing System (ICLS) is very similar to civilian ILS systems and is used on virtually all Case III approaches. A "bullseye" is displayed for the pilot, indicating aircraft position in relation to glideslope and final bearing. The Automatic Carrier Landing System (ACLS) is similar to the ICLS, in that it displays "needles" that indicate aircraft position in relation to glideslope and final bearing. An approach utilizing this system is said to be a "Mode II" approach. Additionally, some aircraft are capable of "coupling" their autopilots to the glideslope/azimuth signals received via data link from the ship, allowing for a "hands-off" approach. If the pilot keeps the autopilot coupled until touchdown, this is referred to as a "Mode I" approach. If the pilot maintains a couple until the visual approach point (at 34 nautical mile (1.4 km; 0.86 mi)) this is referred to as a "Mode IA" approach.
The Long Range Laser Lineup System (LLS) uses eye-safe lasers, projected aft of the ship, to give pilots a visual indication of their lineup with relation to centerline. The LLS is typically used from as much as 10 nautical miles (19 km; 12 mi) until the landing area can be seen at around 1 nautical mile (1.9 km; 1.2 mi).
Regardless of the case recovery or approach type, the final portion of the landing (34 nautical mile (1.4 km; 0.86 mi) to touchdown) is flown visually. Line-up with the landing area is achieved by lining up painted lines on the landing area centerline with a set of lights that drops from the back of the flight deck. Proper glideslope is maintained using the Fresnel lens Optical Landing System (FLOLS), Improved Fresnel Lens Optical Landing System (IFLOLS), or Manually Operated Visual Landing Aid System (MOVLAS).
If an aircraft is pulled off the approach (if the landing area is not clear, for example) or is waved off by the LSO (for poor parameters or a fouled deck), or misses all the arresting wires ("bolters"), the pilot climbs straight ahead to 1,200 feet (370 m) to the "bolter/wave-off pattern" and waits for instructions from approach control.


== Landing ==

The pilot aims for the middle arresting wire, which is either the second or third depending on the configuration of the carrier. Immediately upon touchdown, the pilot advances the throttles to full power so that a touch and go (known as a "Bolter") can be executed in the event that all trap wires have been missed. Ideally, the tailhook catches the target wire (or cross deck pendant), which abruptly slows the aircraft from approach speed to a full stop in about two seconds. As the aircraft's forward motion stops, the throttles are reduced to idle, and the hook is raised on the aircraft director's signal.

The aircraft director then directs the aircraft to clear the landing area in preparation for the next landing. Remaining ordnance is de-armed, wings are folded, and aircraft are taxied to parking spots and shut down. Immediately upon shutdown (or sometimes prior to that), the aircraft is re-fueled, re-armed, and inspected, minor maintenance is performed, and it is often re-spot prior to the next launch cycle.


== Carrier qualifications ==
The purpose of carrier qualifications (CQ) is to give pilots a dedicated opportunity to develop fundamental skills associated with operating fixed wing, carrier based aircraft and demonstrate acceptable levels of proficiency required for qualification. During CQ, there are typically far fewer aircraft on the flight deck than during cyclic operations. This allows for much easier simultaneous launch and recovery of aircraft. The waist catapults (that are located in the landing area) are generally not used. Aircraft can trap and be taxied immediately to a bow catapult for launch.


=== Types and requirements ===
Carrier qualification is performed for new pilots and periodically for experienced pilots to gain/maintain carrier landing currency. Requirements (the number of landings/touch-and-goes required) are based on the experience of the pilot and the length of time since his last arrested landing.
Undergraduate CQ is for Student Naval Aviators, currently completed in the T-45 Goshawk and consisting of 14 day landings (10 arrested; up to 4 can be "touch and goes").
Initial CQ is flown in a newly designated aviator's first fleet aircraft (F/A-18, EA-6B, or E-2C), consisting of 12 day (minimum 10 arrested) and 8 night landings (minimum 6 arrested).
Transition CQ is for experienced pilots transitioning from one type of aircraft to another, consisting of 12 day landings (minimum 10 arrested) and 6 night arrested landings.
Requalification CQ is for experienced pilots that have not flown from the carrier within the previous six months, consisting of 6 day arrested landings and 4 night arrested landings.


== Gallery ==


== See also ==

Arresting gear
Carrier-based aircraft
Electronics Technician
List of inactive United States Navy aircraft squadrons
List of military aircraft of the United States (naval) / List of United States naval aircraft
List of United States Navy aircraft squadrons
Military aviation
NATOPS
Naval aviation
Naval flight officer
Tailhook
United States Marine Corps Aviation
United States Naval Aviator


== References ==


== External links ==
Carrier: Powerhouse of the fleet  United States Navy
How Aircraft Carriers Work  HowStuffWorksA research assistant is a researcher employed, often on a temporary contract, by a university or a research institute, for the purpose of assisting in academic research. Research assistants are not independent and not directly responsible for the outcome of the research and are responsible to a supervisor or principal investigator. Research assistants are often educated to degree level and might be enrolled in a postgraduate degree program and simultaneously teach.


== Undergraduate and Post-doctoral level ==
Although a research assistant is normally appointed at graduate level, undergraduates are also sometimes appointed to support research.
Similarly, someone who has recently been awarded a doctoral degree may hold a temporary appointment as a postdoctoral research assistant.


== Clinical research assistant ==
A clinical research assistant is employed by a hospital or medical research centre, who is involved in the administration of clinical trials. He or she may assist a senior investigator with recruiting and enrolling research subjects, as well as with correspondence and grant applications.


== See also ==
Academic freedom
Graduate student
Research associate
Researcher


== References ==Mercer is the world's largest human resources consulting firm. Headquartered in New York City, Mercer has more than 20,500 employees, is based in more than 40 countries, and operates internationally in more than 130 countries. Mercer is a subsidiary of global professional services firm Marsh & McLennan.


== History ==
Started in the United States in 1937 as the employee benefits department of Marsh & McLennan, Inc., the company took the name of William M. Mercer in 1959, when Marsh & McLennan acquired William M. Mercer Limited, a Canadian firm founded by William Manson Mercer in Vancouver in 1945. In 1959, Mercer became a wholly owned subsidiary of Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. In 2002, its name was changed to Mercer Human Resource Consulting.
In 2004, the company acquired Houston, TX-based Synhrgy HR Technologies, a human resources technology and outsourcing services company. Also in 2004, Mercer admitted giving the NYSE board a compensation report that contained "omissions and inaccuracies" that led to a $139.5 million pay package for former NYSE Chairman Richard Grasso. Mercer had been brought in to advise the stock exchange on Grasso's 2003 contract and his request for $139.5 million. The consultancy returned $440,000 in fees it collected from the NYSE and provided key documents in the lawsuit.
In 2007, the company became simply "Mercer." Also in 2007, Mercer acquired Hfer Vorsorge-Management, a German actuarial and retirement consulting firm. At the time, the acquisition reportedly gave Mercer the top market position in Germany.
In 2008, Mercer's Italian human capital consulting business merged with Tesi, an Italian competitor. The combined business, Mercer Tesi was noted at the time to be the largest HR consultancy in Italy.
In 2010, Mercer acquired ORC Worldwide, an expert in international work assignments. Also in 2010, Mercer acquired Brecksville, Ohio-based Innovative Process Administration LLC (IPA), a health benefits and technology provider.
In 2011, Mercer acquired Fort Lauderdale, FL-based Mahoney & Associates, a defined contribution plan provider. Also in 2011, Mercer acquired Alicia Smith & Associates, a Washington DC-based Medicaid policy consulting firm.
In 2013, Mercer acquired British Columbia-based Hall Consulting Limited (HCL), an HR consultant and salary surveyor focusing on the mining and energy business. Also in 2013, Mercer acquired PricewaterhouseCoopers' pension windup (termination) administration business in Canada. Also in 2013, Mercer acquired Global Remuneration Solutions (GRS), a South African compensation and benefits survey data and rewards information provider.
In 2014, Mercer acquired Norwell, MA-based Transition Assist, a private health care exchange specializing in coverage for Medicare-eligible retirees. Also in 2014, Mercer acquired Jeitosa Group International, a business and technology consultancy, and acquired a 34% stake in South Africa-based employee benefits specialist Alexander Forbes. Later that year, Mercer acquired Swiss private markets manager and consultant SCM, and Denarius, a Santiago, Chile-based consulting firm focused on compensation and benefits survey and information products.
In 2015, Mercer made two acquisitions. It acquired Hopkinton, MA-based Comptryx, a workforce metrics company offering surveying, modeling and analytics services,  and also acquired HRBS, a provider of career and talent consulting and information services to clients across Asia, with concentrated strength in Hong Kong, Singapore and mainland China.


== Lines of business ==
Mercer offers consulting and research services in the areas of health, retirement, investments and talent. Additionally, Mercer has an M&A business segment that provides consulting services regarding human capital and related issues in financial transactions. The company helps clients with global HR issues, balance sheet risk and post-acquisition integration. In certain markets around the world, Mercer provides localized employee benefit services under the Mercer Marsh Benefits name in partnership with sister operating company, Marsh.


=== Health ===
Mercer's Health & Benefits business assists employers with the design, management and administration of employee health care programs, and offers support managing related compliance issues. Mercer also provides a private benefits exchange called Mercer Marketplace.


=== Retirement ===
Mercer's Retirement group provides strategic and compliance-related retirement services and solutions, including assistance in the design, governance and risk management of defined benefit, defined contribution and hybrid retirement plans.


=== Investments ===
Mercer's Investments group provides investment consulting and other services for wealth management companies including pension fund sponsors, foundations and endowments. These institutional investment services range from strategy and implementation to portfolio management. Investment services include manager of managers funds offered to institutional investors such as retirement plans, endowments and foundations and wealth managers. As of December 31, 2014, Mercer had assets under management of $116 billion worldwide.
The Mercer Pension Risk Exchange helps companies move their pension liabilities to an annuity insurer. The platform allows pension plan sponsors to execute group annuity buyouts more quickly, with competitive pricing.
Mercer's Retirement, Health and Investments businesses also provide outsourced benefits administration services.


=== Talent ===
Mercer's Talent businesses offer advisory services in the areas of improving employee engagement, management and employee compensation, including improving the effectiveness of their clients' human resource operations.
Within the Talent group, the Information Products Solutions business provides clients with human capital information and analytical capabilities to improve strategic human capital decision making. The Communications business helps clients plan and implement HR programs and other organizational changes designed to maximize employee engagement, drive desired employee behaviors and achieve improvements in business performance.
The Talent group offers proprietary survey data and decision support tools to provide clients with information to improve decisions related to talent management.


==== Survey data ====
The Mercer Quality of Living Survey is designed to help companies create compensation packages for executives living overseas.
The Mercer National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Benefits shows trends in employer-sponsored benefits.


==== Decision support tools ====
The Mercer Mobile Housing Solution allows HR managers to calculate expatriate living expenses.


=== M&A ===
Mercer's Mergers and Acquisitions Transactions Services group supports clients with issues related to cross-border transactions, divestitures, mergers, and related HR integration services.


== Regions ==
Since January 2013 Mercer has been organized into three geographic regions, each with a regional president: North America, EuroPac (Europe + Pacific markets of Australia and New Zealand) and Growth Markets (Asia, Africa and Latin America). Headquarters for the North American region are in New York City, for EuroPac in London, and for Growth Markets in Singapore. Less than half of the organizations employees are based in North America.


== See also ==
List of most expensive cities for expatriate employees


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Mercer Comptryx site

http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-insidertrading-allen-idUSKCN0WH2L3An associate attorney is a lawyer and an employee of a law firm who does not hold an ownership interest as a partner.


== Types ==


=== Practicing attorney ===
An associate may be a junior or senior attorney, but normally does not hold an ownership interest in the firm even if associated with the firm for many years. First-year associates are entry-level junior attorneys and are generally recent law school graduates in their first year of law practice.
Generally, an associate has the goal of being made a partner in the firm, after a number of years gaining practice experience and being assigned to increasingly more important and remunerative tasks. At firms with an "up or out" policy, associates who are repeatedly passed over for promotion to partner may be asked to resign. Some firms will also have "non-partner-track" associates who, though performing satisfactorily as employees, for whatever reason, will not be promoted to partner.
Junior attorneys were formerly called "law clerks"; the term "associate attorney" was coined by Emory Buckner, hiring partner of Root, Clark & Bird (which subsequently became Dewey Ballantine) in the 1920s. The term "law clerk" now generally refers to an attorney who serves as a research and writing assistant in a judge's chambers, although some law firms use the term to refer to a lawyer or non-lawyer who has specialized knowledge in one of the firm's practice areas but is not classified as a practicing attorney at the law firm.


=== Summer associates ===
Summer associates are current law students who have usually completed their second year of school (or in some cases, their first year of law school) and are interning at the firm for the summer. Summer associates have not passed the bar exam and are not lawyers. The summer associate program is often the primary method by which a law firm recruits for full-time associate positions.


== Compensation ==
According to published data from the New York Times, the annual base salary for partner-track first year associate attorneys at top law firms in major U.S. legal markets such as New York, California, Massachusetts, the District of Columbia, and Texas can range from $160,000 to $180,000 per yearwith salary varying depending on the size and reputation of the firm.


== References ==To invest is to allocate money (or sometimes another resource, such as time) in the expectation of some benefit in the future.
In finance, the benefit from investment is called a return. The return may consist of capital gain and/or investment income, including dividends, interest, rental income etc. The projected economic return is the appropriately discounted value of the future returns. The historic return comprises the actual capital gain (or loss) and/or income over a period of time.
Investment generally results in acquiring an asset, also called an investment. If the asset is available at a price worth investing, it is normally expected either to generate income, or to appreciate in value, so that it can be sold at a higher price (or both).
Investors generally expect higher returns from riskier investments. Financial assets range from low-risk, low-return investments, such as high-grade government bonds, to those with higher risk and higher expected commensurate reward, such as emerging markets stock investments.
Investors, particularly novices, are often advised to adopt an investment strategy and diversify their portfolio. Diversification has the statistical effect of reducing overall risk.


== Related terms ==
Investment differs from arbitrage, in which profit is generated without investing capital or bearing risk.
An investor may bear a risk of loss of some or all of their capital invested, whereas in saving (such as in a bank deposit) the risk of loss in nominal value is normally remote. (Note that if the currency of a savings account differs from the account holder's home currency, then there is the risk that the exchange rate between the two currencies will move unfavorably, so that the value in the account holder's home currency of the savings account decreases.)
Speculation involves a level of risk which is greater than most investors would generally consider justified by the expected return. An alternative characterization of speculation is its short-term, opportunistic nature.


== Famous investors ==
Investors famous for their success include Warren Buffett. In March 2013 Forbes magazine, Warren Buffett ranked number 2 in their Forbes 400 list. Buffett has advised in numerous articles and interviews that a good investment strategy is long term and choosing the right assets to invest in requires due diligence.
Edward O. Thorp was a highly successful hedge fund manager in the 1970s and 1980s who spoke of a similar approach.
The investment principles of both of these investors have points in common with the Kelly criterion for money management. Numerous interactive calculators which use the Kelly criterion can be found online.


== Intermediaries and collective investments ==
Investments are often made indirectly through intermediary financial institutions. These intermediaries include pension funds, banks, and insurance companies. They may pool money received from a number of individual end investors into funds such as investment trusts, unit trusts, SICAVs etc. to make large scale investments. Each individual investor holds an indirect or direct claim on the assets purchased, subject to charges levied by the intermediary, which may be large and varied.
Approaches to investment sometimes referred to in marketing of collective investments include dollar cost averaging and market timing.


== History ==
The Code of Hammurabi (around 1700 BC) provided a legal framework for investment, establishing a means for the pledge of collateral by codifying debtor and creditor rights in regard to pledged land. Punishments for breaking financial obligations were not as severe as those for crimes involving injury or death.
In the early 1900s purchasers of stocks, bonds, and other securities were described in media, academia, and commerce as speculators. By the 1950s, the term investment had come to denote the more conservative end of the securities spectrum, while speculation was applied by financial brokers and their advertising agencies to higher risk securities much in vogue at that time. Since the last half of the 20th century, the terms speculation and speculator have specifically referred to higher risk ventures.


== Value investment ==

A value investor buys undervalued securities (and sells overvalued ones). To identify undervalued securities, a value investor uses analysis of the financial reports of the issuer to evaluate the security. Value investors employ accounting ratios, such as earnings per share and sales growth, to identify securities trading at prices below their worth.
Warren Buffett and Benjamin Graham are notable examples of value investors. Graham and Dodd's seminal work Security Analysis was written in the wake of the Wall Street Crash of 1929.
The price to earnings ratio (P/E), or earnings multiple, is a particularly significant and recognized fundamental ratio, with a function of dividing the share price of stock, by its earnings per share. This will provide the value representing the sum investors are prepared to expend for each dollar of company earnings. This ratio is an important aspect, due to its capacity as measurement for the comparison of valuations of various companies. A stock with a lower P/E ratio will cost less per share, than one with a higher P/E, taking into account the same level of financial performance; therefore, it essentially means a low P/E is the preferred option.
An instance, in which the price to earnings ratio has a lesser significance, is when companies in different industries are compared. An example; although, it is reasonable for a telecommunications stock to show a P/E in the low teens; in the case of hi-tech stock, a P/E in the 40s range, is not unusual. When making comparisons the P/E ratio can give you a refined view of a particular stock valuation.
For investors paying for each dollar of a company's earnings, the P/E ratio is a significant indicator, but the price-to-book ratio (P/B) is also a reliable indication of how much investors are willing to spend on each dollar of company assets. In the process of the P/B ratio, the share price of a stock is divided by its net assets; any intangibles, such as goodwill, are not taken into account. It is a crucial factor of the price-to-book ratio, due to it indicating the actual payment for tangible assets and not the more difficult valuation, of intangibles. Accordingly, the P/B could be considered a comparatively, conservative metric.


== Free cash flow and capital structure ==
Free cash flow measures the cash a company generates which is available to its debt and equity investors, after allowing for reinvestment in working capital and capital expenditure. High and rising free cash flow therefore tend to make a company more attractive to investors.
The debt-to-equity ratio is an indicator of capital structure. A high proportion of debt, reflected in a high debt-to-equity ratio, tends to make a company's earnings, free cash flow, and ultimately the returns to its investors, more risky or volatile. Investors compare a company's debt-to-equity ratio with those of other companies in the same industry, and examine trends in debt-to-equity ratios and free cash flow.


== EBITDA ==
A popular valuation metric is Earnings Before Interest, Tax, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA), with application for example to valuing unlisted companies and mergers and acquisitions.
For an attractive investment, for example a company competing in a high growth industry, an investor might expect a significant acquisition premium above book value or current market value, which values the company at several times the most recent EBITDA. A private equity fund for example may buy a target company for a multiple of its historical or forecasted EBITDA, perhaps as much as 6 or 8 times.
In certain cases, an EBITDA may be sacrificed by a company, in order for the pursuance of future growth; a strategy frequently used by corporate giants, such as, Amazon, Google and Microsoft, among others. This is a business decision that can impact negatively on buyout offers, founded on EBITDA and can be the cause of many negotiations, failing. It may be recognized as a valuation breach, with many investors maintaining that sellers are too demanding, while buyers are regarded as failing to realize the long-term potential of, expenditure or acquisitions.


== Capital gains taxes ==
The amount to pay in taxes for long term investments, investments that span over a year long term, and short term investments such as those that are below a year are different. The long term investments range from Zero to twenty percent for capital gains and they are regulated by what tax bracket you are in for income taxes. For the zero to fifteen percent income tax bracket you could qualify for the zero percent long-term capital gains rate. The next bracket is the fifteen to twenty percent income tax bracket where you are set at fifteen percent capital gains tax for long term investments. The next bracket is between twenty and 39.6 percent and that leads to a twenty percent capital gains tax however with these numbers you should add 3.8 percent for the health care surtax. The short term capital gains tax is also related to your total taxable income and is taxed at the same rate as your income and ranges from ten to 39.6 percent.


== Types of financial investment ==
Types of financial investments include:
Alternative investments
Traditional investments


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Investing at DMOZMinistry of Human Resources and Social Security (MOHRSS) of the Government of the People's Republic of China is a ministry under the State Council which is responsible for national labor polices, standards, regulations and managing the national social security. This includes labor force management, labor relationship readjustment, social insurance management and legal construction of labor. The State Bureau of Civil Servants reports to the new ministry.


== History ==
The ministry is created from the former Ministry of Personnel and Ministry of Labour and Social Security. This was announced at the 2008 National People's Congress.
Since March 17, 2008, the ministry is headed by Yin Weimin.


== Responsibilities ==
The MOHRSS has responsibility for managing the employment market in mainland China. Due to the financial crisis of 2008/Late 2000s recession, the department has recommended companies to prevent and control large staff reduction. The agency also other government agencies to provide assistance to labor-intensive industries and enterprises to create more employment. MOHRSS stressed that priority be given to migrant workers, laid-off workers, poor people and graduates from universities and colleges in offering works.


== List of Ministers of Human Resources and Social Security ==
(Human Resources) original Ministry of Personnel
(Social Security) original Ministry of Labour
Human Resources and Social Security (Personnel and Labour)


== See also ==

Labor Contract Law of the People's Republic of China
Ministries of the People's Republic of China
Social welfare in China
China Accreditation Test for Translators and Interpreters


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website of the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security (Chinese)DCS are a British Asian live Bhangra band formed in 1983. They are seen as one of the first bands of the UK Bhangra scene along with other bands such as Alaap, Apna Sangeet, Heera, Shava Shava led by Nirmal Kumar Nirmal and many more. As well as Bhangra, DCS also perform in Hindi and English.


== Discography ==
"Teri Shaun" 1985 (Multitone Records)
"Au Nach Lao" 1986 (EMI)
"123 Go" 1986 (Mighty M Records)
"Bhangra's Gonna Get You" 1988 (Multitone Records)
"DCS O.U.1" 1992 (Multitone Records)
"Doin It" 1994 (Multi/BMG Records)
"Eat Ehythm" 1995 (Multi/BMG Records)
"be with me" 1995? mainstream single
"Punjabi Dance Nation" 1998 (Kamlee Records)
"Tenu Kaul Ke"

"Desi Culture Shock" 2007 (Kamlee Records)
"Oh Jaan Meri Yah" (featuring Juggy D)
"Rab Ne Banaiyan"
"Pilade Pilade"
"Bothle Sharab Diye"


== Impact on Bhangra ==
DCS are seen as the predecessors to and have influenced modern day bands such as B21 and many more. Shin is seen as one of the most prominent Bhangra vocalists from England.
DCS are also one of the most respected bands in the industry due to their lack of variation between their recordings as opposed to other live bands and their live performances.
In 2005 DCS won "Best Group" at the UK Asian Music Awards. In 2008 Shin was awarded an "Outstanding Achievement" award at the UK Asian Music Awards for his work with DCS.


== See also ==
List of bhangra bands
B21
Juggy D
Gurdas Mann
Channi Singh
Johnny Kalsi
Dhol Foundation


== References ==


== External links ==
Interview with ShinThis is a list of aircraft carriers which are currently in service, reserve, under construction, or being rebuilt. An aircraft carrier is a warship with a full-length flight deck, hangar and facilities for arming, deploying, and recovering aircraft. The list only refers to the status of the ship, not availability or condition of an air wing. This includes helicopter carriers and amphibious assault ships, which are vessels whose primary purpose is to carry, arm, deploy, and recover aircraft.


== Summary ==


== Commissioned carriers ==


== Carriers in reserve ==


== Carriers undergoing sea trials ==
None as of September 2016.


== Carriers under construction or being fitted out ==


== Carriers ordered ==


== Other planned carriers ==


== See also ==
List of aircraft carriers (all time)
List of aircraft carriers by configuration
List of aircraft carriers by country
List of sunken aircraft carriers
Timeline for aircraft carrier service


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
International Institute for Strategic Studies; Hackett, James (ed.) (2010-02-03). The Military Balance 2010. London: Routledge. ISBN 1-85743-557-5.A consultant (from Latin: consultare "to discuss") is a professional who provides expert advice in a particular area such as security (electronic or physical), management, education, accountancy, law, human resources, marketing (and public relations), finance, engineering, science or any of many other specialized fields.
A consultant is usually an expert or an experienced professional in a specific field and has a wide knowledge of the subject matter. The role of consultant outside the medical sphere (where the term is used specifically for a grade of doctor) can fall under one of two general categories:
Internal consultant - someone who operates within an organization but is available to be consulted on areas of his specialization by other departments or individuals (acting as clients); or
External consultant - someone who is employed externally to the client (either by a consulting firm or some other agency) whose expertise is provided on a temporary basis, usually for a fee. Consulting firms range in size from sole proprietorships consisting of a single consultant, small businesses consisting of a small number of consultants, to mid- to large consulting firms, which in some cases are multinational corporations. This type of consultant generally engages with multiple and changing clients, which are typically companies, non-profit organizations, or governments.
By hiring a consultant, clients have access to deeper levels of expertise than would be financially feasible for them to retain in-house on a long-term basis. As well, clients can control their expenditures on consulting services by only purchasing as much services from the outside consultant as desired.
Consultants provide their advice to their clients in a variety of forms. Reports and presentations are often used. However, in some specialized fields, the consultant may develop customized software or other products for the client. Depending on the nature of the consulting services and the wishes of the client, the advice from the consultant may be made public, by placing the report or presentation online, or the advice may be kept confidential, and only given to the senior executives of the organization paying for the consulting services.


== Ways of work ==
The range of areas of expertise covered by the term "consultant" is wide. One of the more common types is the management consultant. Consulting and the means by which the (external) consultant is engaged vary according to industry and local practice. However the principal difference between a consultant and a temp is generally one of direction. A consultant is engaged to fulfill a brief in terms of helping to find solutions to specific issues but the ways in which that is to be done generally falls to the consultant to decide, within constraints such as budget and resources agreed with the client. A temp, on the other hand is normally fulfilling an employment role that usually exists within the organization and is helping to bridge a gap caused by staffing shortages. They are directed by the normal management structure of the organization. There is however a hybrid form where a consultant may be hired as an interim manager or executive, bringing a combination of specialist expertise to bear on a role that is temporarily vacant (usually at a senior level).
Some consultants are employed indirectly by the client via a consultancy staffing company, a company that provides consultants on an agency basis. The staffing company itself does not usually have consulting expertise but works rather like an employment agency. This form of working is particularly common in the ICT sector. Such consultants are often called "contractors" since they are usually providing technical services (such as programming or systems analysis) that could be performed in-house were it not easier for the employer to operate a flexible system of only hiring such technologists at times of peak workload rather than permanently.
While many consultants work for firms, there is also an increasing number of independent consultants. Many of these professionals also join networks or alliances that allow them to find collaborators and new clients.


== Common types ==
In the business, and as of recently the private sphere, the most commonly found consultants are:
3D Consultants who are specialists in the field of 3D scanning, printing, modeling, designing, engineering, building, and everything that has to do with the three dimensions.
Business transformation consultants are specialists in assisting business stakeholders to align the strategy and objectives to their business operations. This may include assisting in the identification of business change opportunities and capability gaps, defining solutions to enable required business capability (this may include technology, organisational, or process solutions) and supporting the implementation of these changes across the business.
Engineering consultants provide engineering-related services such as design, supervision, execution, repair, operation, maintenance, technology, creation of drawings and specifications, and make recommendations to public, companies, firms and industries.
Educational consultants assists students or parents in making educational decisions and giving advices in various issues, such as tuition fees, visa, and enrolling at Higher education
Human-resources (HR) consultants who provide expertise around employment practice and people management.
Immigration consultant who helps through legal procedure of immigration from one country to other country.
Internet consultants who are specialists in business use of the internet and keep themselves up-to-date with new and changed capabilities offered by the web. Ideally internet consultants also have practical experience and expertise in management skills such as strategic planning, change, projects, processes, training, team-working and customer satisfaction.
Information-technology (IT) consultants in many disciplines such as computer hardware, software engineering, or networks.
Interim managers as mentioned above may be independent consultants who act as interim executives with decision-making power under corporate policies or statutes. They may sit on specially constituted boards or committees.
Marketing consultants who are generally called upon to advise around areas of product development and related marketing matters including marketing strategy.
Process consultants who are specialists in the design or improvement of operational processes and can be specific to the industry or sector.
Public-relations (PR) consultants dealing specifically with public relations matters external to the client organization and often engaged on a semi-permanent basis by larger organizations to provide input and guidance.
Performance consultants who focus on the execution of an initiative or overall performance of their client.
Sales consultants who focus on all levels of sales and marketing for the improvement of sales ROI and moving share from competition
Strategy consultants (AKA management consultants) working on the development of and improvements to organizational strategy alongside senior management in many industries.
A more comprehensive list of types is shown below.


== Place of work ==
Though most of the back-office research and analysis occurs at the consultants' offices or home-offices, in the case of smaller consulting firms, consultants typically work at the site of the client for at least some of the time. By spending time at the client's organization, the consultant is able to observe work processes, interview workers, managers, executives, board members, or other individuals, and study how the organization operates.
The governing factor on where a consultant works tends to be the amount of interaction required with other employees of the client. If a management consultant is providing advice to a software firm that is struggling with employee morale, absenteeism and issues with managers and senior engineers leaving the firm, the consultant will probably spend a good deal of time at the client's office, interviewing staff, engineers, managers and executives, and observing work processes. On the other hand, a legal consultant asked to provide advice on a specific property law issue might only have a few meetings at the client's office, and conduct the majority of her work at the consultant's office and in legal libraries.
Similarly, the growth of online, highly skilled consultant marketplaces has begun to grow. These online platforms provide consultants with experience working for typical consulting firms to easily transition into freelancing. This means that many consultants have become much more flexible in where they can work and the nature of their work.


== Qualifications ==
There is no single qualification to be a consultant other than those laid down in relation to medical, psychological and engineering personnel who have attained this level-degree in it and/or professional licences. Consultants may hold undergraduate degrees, graduate degrees, professional degrees and/or professional designations pertaining to their field(s) of expertise. In some fields, a consultant may be required to hold certain professional licences (e.g., a civil engineer providing consulting on a bridge project may have to be a professional engineer). In other types of consulting, there may be no specific qualification requirements. A legal consultant may have to be a member of the bar and/or hold a law degree. An accounting consultant may have to have an accounting designation, such as Chartered Accountant status. On the other hand, some individuals become consultants after a lengthy and distinguished career as an executive or political leader, so their management or government experience may be their main "credential", rather than a degree or professional designation.
Consultant Peter Block defines a consultant as "someone who has influence over an individual, group, or organization, but who has no direct authority to implement changes." He contrasts this with a surrogate manager who is a person who "acts on behalf of, or in place of, a manager." The key difference is that a consultant never makes decisions for the individual or group, whereas a surrogate manager does make decisions.
Accredited Associates are bound by a Code of Ethics that requires the consultant to only provide practical advice that works  by Analysing as a Generalist and Solving as a Specialist  using the skills and experience of a sub-contracted fellow Associate, thus at all times providing the client with the best available advice and support. Internationally the accreditation of Management Consultants is overseen by higher education training and accreditation organizations.
The International Council of Management Consulting Institutes (ICMCI) was founded in 1987 and has around 50 member institutes covering the globe. The award of Certified Management Consultant (CMC) status is its internationally recognised accreditation (in some countries like the US, conforms to ISO/IEC 17024:2003 standards) that is not specific to the technical content of the consultant's practice. For instance this could be held equally by a Human Resources (HR) expert or a Chemical Engineer operating as management consultants in their field(s) of expertise. There are about 10,000 CMCs worldwide.
Chartered Institute of Management Consultants (CIMC) is a not-for-profit professional body chartered federally under Letters Patent granted by the Government of Canada. CIMC is also chartered under the Laws of the State of Delaware, USA. CIMC is also registered with the National Certification Commission, USA. The CIMC award Chartered Management Consultant Ch.MC designation as a global management credential.
International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) is a Federation whose members are national associations of Consulting Engineers.
Management Consulting Institute (MCI) is a non-profit founded in 2009 and has trained over 5000 individuals in MBA Programs in the United States. Its mission is to make Management Consulting a Business Discipline and to democratize business consulting competencies and skills and make them available to everyone, everywhere. It develops standards and body of knowledge for Management Consulting through a Board of experts (Management Consulantants currently or previously at leading management consulting firms) that defines the competencies and skills required by people wanting to become management consultants. It provide the mechanisms to learn these skills as well as individual recognition through certificates, which are available globally through its network of partners.


== Types ==


== See also ==
Adviser
Biotechnology consulting
Contingent workforce
Economic consulting
Interim Management
IRS Reclassification
Management consulting
Permatemp
Political consulting
Public consultation
Tax advisor
Umbrella company


== References ==Yankee White is an administrative nickname for a background check given in the United States of America for Department of Defense personnel and contractor employees working with the President and Vice President. Obtaining such clearance requires, in part, a Single Scope Background Investigation (SSBI) which is conducted under the manuals of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management.
Individuals having Yankee White clearances undergo extensive background investigation. The Yankee White clearance includes requirements for U.S. citizenship and unquestionable loyalty to the United States.


== Clearance categories ==
There are three categories of Yankee White clearance.
Category one clearance is required for selected personnel serving in extremely sensitive positions in direct support of the President or Vice President. This includes:
Chief of Staff, White House Military Office (WHMO)
Assistant Chief of Staff, WHMO
Military Aides to the President and Vice President
Director, White House Medical Unit
Chief, US Army Transportation Agency, White House
Director, Special Programs Office, WHMO
Security Advisor, WHMO
Food Service Coordinator of the White House Staff Mess
Commander and Deputy Commander, White House Communications Agency
Presidential Pilot and Deputy Presidential Pilot, 89th Airlift Wing, Andrews AFB
Commanding Officer and Executive Officer, Marine Helicopter Squadron One (HMX-1)
Commanding Officer and Executive Officer, Naval Support Facility Thurmont, MD (Camp David)
Director, Presidential Contingency Programs Office, WHMO
Director, Airlift Operations Office, WHMO
Other personnel as determined by the Director, WHMO and the Deputy Assistant to the Vice President for National Security Affairs

Category two clearance is required for personnel assigned on a permanent or full-time basis to duties in direct support of the President or Vice President (including the office staff of the Director, WHMO, and all individuals under his or her control). This includes but is not limited to:
Presidential aircrew and associated maintenance and security personnel
White House Communications Agency personnel
White House Transportation Agency personnel
White House Staff Mess personnel
White House Medical Unit personnel
DoD personnel assigned to the Office of the Vice President
Personnel assigned to the Naval Support Facility Thurmont, MD, more commonly known as "Camp David".
Employees of contractor firms who provide recurring services or who require unescorted access to Presidential support areas (PSAs), activities, or equipmentincluding the maintenance of the Presidential retreat or Vice President's residence, communications, aircraft, or facilities
Principals of those firms used for PSAs who have direct involvement in the contract

Category three clearance is required for personnel assigned to honor guard units, ceremonial units, and military bands who perform at Presidential or Vice Presidential functions and facilities.


== See also ==
Presidential Service Association
Security clearance


== References ==


== External links ==
Presidential Service AssociationA software engineer is a person who applies the principles of software engineering to the design, development, maintenance, testing, and evaluation of the software and systems that make computers or anything containing software work.


== Overview ==
Prior to the mid-1960s, software practitioners called themselves computer programmers or software developers, regardless of their actual jobs. Many people prefer to call themselves software developer and programmer, because most widely agree what these terms mean, while software engineer is still being debated. In many companies, the titles programmer and software developer were changed to software engineer, for many categories of programmers.


=== A state of the art ===

In May 2015, the United States U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics published an updated count of software engineers which has gone up from 760,840 in 2004 to 1,554,960 in 2015; in the same period there were some 1,610,480 practitioners employed in the U.S. in all other engineering disciplines combined. The label software engineer is used very liberally in the corporate world. Very few of the practicing software engineers actually hold Engineering degrees from accredited universities.


== Education ==
About half of all practitioners today have degrees in computer science, information systems, or information technology. A small, but growing, number of practitioners have software engineering degrees. In 1987, Imperial College London introduced the first three-year software engineering Bachelor's degree in the UK and the world; in the following year, the University of Sheffield established a similar program. In 1996, the Rochester Institute of Technology established the first software engineering bachelor's degree program in the United States, however, it did not obtain ABET accreditation until 2003, the same time as Rice University, Clarkson University, Milwaukee School of Engineering and Mississippi State University obtained theirs. In 1997, PSG College of Technology in Coimbatore, India was the first to start a five-year integrated Master of Science degree in Software Engineering.
Since then, software engineering undergraduate degrees have been established at many universities. A standard international curriculum for undergraduate software engineering degrees was recently defined by the CCSE. As of 2004, in the U.S., about 50 universities offer software engineering degrees, which teach both computer science and engineering principles and practices. The first software engineering Master's degree was established at Seattle University in 1979. Since then graduate software engineering degrees have been made available from many more universities. Likewise in Canada, the Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board (CEAB) of the Canadian Council of Professional Engineers has recognized several software engineering programs.
In 1998, the US Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) established the first doctorate program in Software Engineering in the world. Additionally, many online advanced degrees in Software Engineering have appeared such as the Master of Science in Software Engineering (MSE) degree offered through the Computer Science and Engineering Department at California State University, Fullerton. Steve McConnell opines that because most universities teach computer science rather than software engineering, there is a shortage of true software engineers. ETS University and UQAM (Universit du Qubec  Montral) were mandated by IEEE to develop the Software Engineering Body of Knowledge (SWEBOK), which has become an ISO standard describing the body of knowledge covered by a software engineer.


=== Other degrees ===
In business, some software engineering practitioners have MIS or computer information systems degrees. In embedded systems, some have electrical engineering, electronics engineering, computer science with emphasis in "embedded systems" or computer engineering degrees, because embedded software often requires a detailed understanding of hardware. In medical software, practitioners may have medical informatics, general medical, or biology degrees.
Some practitioners have mathematics, science, engineering, or technology degrees. Some have philosophy (logic in particular) or other non-technical degrees.For instance, Barry Boehm earned degrees in mathematics. And, others have no degrees.


== Profession ==


=== Employment ===

Most software engineers work as employees or contractors. Software engineers work with businesses, government agencies (civilian or military), and non-profit organizations. Some software engineers work on their own as consulting software engineers. Some organizations have specialists to perform each of the tasks in the software development process. Other organizations required software engineers to do many or all of them. Entry-level software engineer or associate software engineer may be best. Some companies offer software engineer as an entry-level position. In large projects, people may specialize in only one role. In small projects, people may fill several or all roles at the same time. Specializations include: in industry (analysts, architects, developers, testers, technical support, managers) and in academia (educators, researchers).
There is considerable debate over the future employment prospects for Software Engineers and other IT Professionals. For example, an online futures market called the Future of IT Jobs in America attempts to answer whether there will be more IT jobs, including software engineers, in 2012 than there were in 2002. Possible opportunities for Advancement can be as a Software Engineer, then to a Senior Software Engineer, or straight to a Senior Software Engineer, depending on skills and reputation. Services exist that are trying to better gauge the coding ability of an engineer, given not all engineers progress their abilities at the same rate, and to make it easier for both employers and employees to find a good match in terms of jobs.


=== Work ===
This job is office-based, and most of the work is done during normal office hours, but can sometimes lead to working away and working late or during weekends, depending on where and when the client is situated. The job can also be done at home or anywhere a computer is set up. Some high-profile companies have encouraged software engineers to work for long hours; Apple's Steve Jobs set up a culture where engineers would never take holidays and work throughout weekends, yet love what they were doing.


=== Impact of globalization ===
Most students in the developed world have avoided degrees related to software engineering because of the fear of offshore outsourcing (importing software products or services from other countries) and of being displaced by foreign visa workers. Although government statistics do not currently show a threat to software engineering itself; a related career, computer programming does appear to have been affected. Often one is expected to start out as a computer programmer before being promoted to software engineer. Thus, the career path to software engineering may be rough, especially during recessions.
Some career counselors suggest a student also focus on "people skills" and business skills rather than purely technical skills because such "soft skills" are allegedly more difficult to offshore. Reasonable command over reading, writing & speaking English is asked by most of employers. It is the quasi-management aspects of software engineering that appear to be what has kept it from being impacted by globalization.


=== Prizes ===
There are several prizes in the field of software engineering:
The CODiE awards is a yearly award issued by the Software and Information Industry Association for excellence in software development within the software industry.
Jolt Awards are awards in the software industry.
Stevens Award is a software engineering award given in memory of Wayne Stevens.


== Use of the title "Engineer" ==


=== Suitability of the term ===

Many people believe that software engineering implies a certain level of academic training, professional discipline, adherence to formal processes, and especially legal liability that often are not applied in cases of software development. A common analogy is that working in construction does not make one a civil engineer, and so writing code does not make one a software engineer. Furthermore, because computing doesn't utilize the methods of mathematical physics common to all conventional engineering disciplines, it's more appropriate to call those engaged in this occupation as software developers, computer scientists or similar.
In 1978, computer scientist E. W. Dijkstra wrote in a paper that the coining of the term software engineer was not useful since it was an inappropriate analogy, "The existence of the mere term has been the base of a number of extremely shallowand falseanalogies, which just confuse the issue...Computers are such exceptional gadgets that there is good reason to assume that most analogies with other disciplines are too shallow to be of any positive value, are even so shallow that they are only confusing."
In each of the last few decades, at least one radical new approach has entered the mainstream of software development (e.g. Structured Programming, Object Orientation), implying that the field is still changing too rapidly to be considered an engineering discipline. Proponents argue that the supposedly radical new approaches are evolutionary rather than revolutionary.
Individual commentators have disagreed sharply on how to define software engineering or its legitimacy as an engineering discipline. David Parnas has said that software engineering is, in fact, a form of engineering. Steve McConnell has said that it is not, but that it should be. Donald Knuth has said that programming is an art and a science. Edsger W. Dijkstra claimed that the terms software engineering and software engineer have been misused and should be considered harmful, particularly in the United States.


=== Regulatory classification ===


==== Iceland ====
The use of the title tlvunarfringur (e. computer scientist) is protected by law in Iceland. Software engineering is taught in Computer Science departments in Icelandic universities. Icelandic law state that a permission must be obtained from the Minister of Industry when the degree was awarded abroad, prior to use of the title. The title is awarded to those who have obtained a BSc degree in Computer Science from a recognized higher educational institution.


==== United Kingdom ====
The U.K. has seen the alignment of the Information Technology Professional and the Engineering Professionals.


==== New Zealand ====
In New Zealand, IPENZ, the professional engineering organization entrusted by the New Zealand government with legal power to license and regulate chartered engineers (CPEng), recognizes software engineering as a legitimate branch of professional engineering and accepts application of software engineers to obtain chartered status provided he or she has a tertiary degree of approved subjects. Software Engineering is included but Computer Science is normally not.


==== Canada ====
In Canada the use of the job title "Engineer" is controlled in each province by self-regulating professional engineering organizations who are also tasked with enforcement of the governing legislation. The intent is that any individual holding themselves out as an engineer has been verified to have been educated to a certain accredited level and their professional practice is subject to a code of ethics and peer scrutiny. It is also illegal to use the title Engineer in Canada unless an individual is licensed.
IT professionals with degrees in other fields (such as computer science or information systems) are restricted from using the title "Software Engineer", or wording "Software Engineer" in a title, depending on their province or territory of residence. In some instances, cases have been taken to court regarding the illegal use of the protected title "Software Engineer".


==== United States ====
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics classifies computer software engineers as a subcategory of "computer specialists", along with occupations such as computer scientist, programmer, and network administrator. The BLS classifies all other engineering disciplines, including computer hardware engineers, as "engineers".
Some of the states regulate the use of terms such as "computer engineer" and even "software engineer". These states include at least Texas and Florida.
There is also a new PE (Professional Engineer) exam beginning in April 2013 for Software Engineering specifically as the process of tougher regulation moves forward.


== See also ==

Bachelor of Science in Information Technology
Bachelor of Software Engineering
Consulting software engineer
Software Engineering Institute


== References ==
